Variables and Data Structures                                                           Chapter Five
                       Chapter One discussed the basic format for data in memory. Chapter Three covered
                   how a computer system physically organizes that data. This chapter finishes this discus-
                   sion by connecting the concept of data representation to its actual physical representation.
                   As the title implies, this chapter concerns itself with two main topics: variables and data
                   structures. This chapter does not assume that you’ve had a formal course in data struc-
                   tures, though such experience would be useful.



5.0       Chapter Overview
                        This chapter discusses how to declare and access scalar variables, integers, reals, data
                   types, pointers, arrays, and structures. You must master these subjects before going on to
                   the next chapter. Declaring and accessing arrays, in particular, seems to present a multi-
                   tude of problems to beginning assembly language programmers. However, the rest of this
                   text depends on your understanding of these data structures and their memory represen-
                   tation. Do not try to skim over this material with the expectation that you will pick it up as
                   you need it later. You will need it right away and trying to learn this material along with
                   later material will only confuse you more.



5.1       Some Additional Instructions: LEA, LES, ADD, and MUL
                        The purpose of this chapter is not to present the 80x86 instruction set. However, there
                   are four additional instructions (above and beyond mov) that will prove handy in the dis-
                   cussion throughout the rest of this chapter. These are the load effective address (lea), load es
                   and general purpose register (les), addition (add), and multiply (mul). These instructions,
                   along with the mov instruction, provide all the necessary power to access the different
                   data types this chapter discusses.
                       The lea instruction takes the form:
                                       lea         reg16, memory

                   reg16 is a 16 bit general purpose register. Memory is a memory location represented by a
                   mod/reg/rm byte1 (except it must be a memory location, it cannot be a register).
                        This instruction loads the 16 bit register with the offset of the location specified by the
                   memory operand. lea ax,1000h[bx][si], for example, would load ax with the address of the
                   memory location pointed at by 1000h[bx][si]. This, of course, is the value 1000h+bx+si. Lea
                   is also quite useful for obtaining the address of a variable. If you have a variable I some-
                   where in memory, lea bx,I will load the bx register with the address (offset) of I.
                       The les instruction takes the form
                                        les        reg16, memory32

                       This instruction loads the es register and one of the 16 bit general purpose registers
                   from the specified memory address. Note that any memory address you can specify with
                   a mod/reg/rm byte is legal but like the lea instruction it must be a memory location, not a
                   register.
                       The les instruction loads the specified general purpose register from the word at the
                   given address, it loads the es register from the following word in memory. This instruc-
                   tion, and it’s companion lds (which loads ds) are the only instructions on pre-80386
                   machines that manipulate 32 bits at a time.



      1. Or by the mod/reg/rm -- sib addressing mode bytes on the 80386.


                                                                                                          Page 195

                             Thi d        t         t d ith F      M k     402
Chapter 05

                        The add instruction, like it’s x86 counterpart, adds two values on the 80x86. This
                    instruction takes several forms. There are five forms that concern us here. They are
                                          add          reg, reg
                                          add          reg, memory
                                          add          memory, reg
                                          add          reg, constant
                                          add          memory, constant
                    All these instructions add the second operand to the first leaving the sum in the first oper-
                    and. For example, add bx,5 computes bx := bx + 5.
                        The last instruction to look at is the mul (multiply) instruction. This instruction has
                    only a single operand and takes the form:
                                          mul          reg/memory
                        There are many important details concerning mul that this chapter ignores. For the
                    sake of the discussion that follows, assume that the register or memory location is a 16 bit
                    register or memory location. In such a case this instruction computes dx:ax :=ax*reg/mem2.
                    Note that there is no immediate mode for this instruction.



5.2       Declaring Variables in an Assembly Language Program
                         Although you’ve probably surmised that memory locations and variables are some-
                    what related, this chapter hasn’t gone out of its way to draw strong parallels between the
                    two. Well, it’s time to rectify that situation. Consider the following short (and useless) Pas-
                    cal program:
                    program useless(input,output);
                    var i,j:integer;
                    begin
                                     i := 10;
                                     write(‘Enter a value for j:’);
                                     readln(j);
                                     i := i*j + j*j;
                                     writeln(‘The result is ‘,i);
                    end.
                         When the computer executes the statement i:=10;3 it makes a copy of the value 10 and
                    somehow remembers this value for use later on. To accomplish this, the compiler sets
                    aside a memory location specifically for the exclusive use of the variable i. Assuming the
                    compiler arbitrarily assigned location DS:10h for this purpose it could use the instruction
                     mov ds:[10h],10 to accomplish this4. If i is a 16 bit word, the compiler would probably
                    assign the variable j to the word starting at location 12h or 0Eh. Assuming it’s location 12h,
                    the second assignment statement in the program might wind up looking like the follow-
                    ing:
                                          mov          ax, ds:[10h]                   ;Fetch value of I
                                          mul          ds:[12h]                       ;Multiply by J
                                          mov          ds:[10h], ax                   ;Save in I (ignore overflow)
                                          mov          ax, ds:[12h]                   ;Fetch J
                                          mul          ds:[12h]                       ;Compute J*J
                                          add          ds:[10h], ax                   ;Add I*J + J*J, store into I




      2. Any time you multiply two 16 bit values you could get a 32 bit result. The 80x86 places this 32 bit result in dx:ax
      with the H.O. word in dx and the L.O. word in ax.
      3. Actually, the computer executes the machine code emitted by the Pascal compiler for this statement; but you need
      not worry about such details here.
      4. But don’t try this at home, folks! There is one minor syntactical detail missing from this instruction. MASM will
      complain bitterly if you attempt to assemble this particular instruction.


Page 196
                                                                             Variables and Data Structures

               Although there are a few details missing from this code, it is fairly straightforward
            and you can easily see what is going on in this program.
                Now imagine a 5,000 line program like this one using variables like ds:[10h], ds:[12h],
            ds:[14h], etc. Would you want to locate the statement where you accidentally stored the
            result of a computation into j rather than i? Indeed, why should you even care that the
            variable i is at location 10h and j is at location 12h? Why shouldn’t you be able to use
            names like i and j rather than worrying about these numerical addresses? It seems reason-
            able to rewrite the code above as:
                                mov        ax, i
                                mul        j
                                mov        i, ax
                                mov        ax, j
                                mul        j
                                add        i, ax
                Of course you can do this in assembly language! Indeed, one of the primary jobs of an
            assembler like MASM is to let you use symbolic names for memory locations. Further-
            more, the assembler will even assign locations to the names automatically for you. You
            needn’t concern yourself with the fact that variable i is really the word at memory location
            DS:10h unless you’re curious.
                 It should come as no surprise that ds will point to the dseg segment in the
            SHELL.ASM file. Indeed, setting up ds so that it points at dseg is one of the first things
            that happens in the SHELL.ASM main program. Therefore, all you’ve got to do is tell the
            assembler to reserve some storage for your variables in dseg and attach the offset of said
            variables with the names of those variables. This is a very simple process and is the sub-
            ject of the next several sections.



5.3   Declaring and Accessing Scalar Variables
                Scalar variables hold single values. The variables i and j in the preceding section are
            examples of scalar variables. Examples of data structures that are not scalars include
            arrays, records, sets, and lists. These latter data types are made up from scalar values.
            They are the composite types. You’ll see the composite types a little later; first you need to
            learn to deal with the scalar types.
                To declare a variable in dseg, you would use a statement something like the following:
            ByteVar             byte       ?
            ByteVar is a label. It should begin at column one on the line somewhere in the dseg segment
            (that is, between the dseg segment and dseg ends statements). You’ll find out all about
            labels in a few chapters, for now you can assume that most legal Pascal/C/Ada identifiers
            are also valid assembly language labels.
                If you need more than one variable in your program, just place additional lines in the
            dseg segment declaring those variables. MASM will automatically allocate a unique stor-
            age location for the variable (it wouldn’t be too good to have i and j located at the same
            address now, would it?). After declaring said variable, MASM will allow you to refer to
            that variable by name rather than by location in your program. For example, after inserting
            the above statement into the data segment (dseg), you could use instructions like
            mov ByteVar,al in your program.
                The first variable you place in the data segment gets allocated storage at location DS:0.
            The next variable in memory gets allocated storage just beyond the previous variable. For
            example, if the variable at location zero was a byte variable, the next variable gets allo-
            cated storage at DS:1. However, if the first variable was a word, the second variable gets
            allocated storage at location DS:2. MASM is always careful to allocate variables in such a
            manner that they do not overlap. Consider the following dseg definition:




                                                                                                 Page 197
Chapter 05

                dseg                segment    para public ‘data’
                bytevar             byte       ?                            ;byte allocates bytes
                wordvar             word       ?                            ;word allocates words
                dwordvar            dword      ?                            ;dword allocs dbl words
                byte2               byte       ?
                word2               word       ?
                dseg                ends
                     MASM allocates storage for bytevar at location DS:0. Because bytevar is one byte long,
                the next available memory location is going to be DS:1. MASM, therefore, allocates storage
                for wordvar at location DS:1. Since words require two bytes, the next available memory
                location after wordvar is DS:3 which is where MASM allocates storage for dwordvar. Dword-
                var is four bytes long, so MASM allocates storage for byte2 starting at location DS:7. Like-
                wise, MASM allocates storage for word2 at location DS:8. Were you to stick another
                variable after word2, MASM would allocate storage for it at location DS:0A.
                    Whenever you refer to one of the names above, MASM automatically substitutes the
                appropriate offset. For example, MASM would translate the mov ax,wordvar instruction
                into mov ax,ds:[1]. So now you can use symbolic names for your variables and completely
                ignore the fact that these variables are really memory locations with corresponding offsets
                into the data segment.



5.3.1        Declaring and using BYTE Variables
                     So what are byte variables good for, anyway? Well you can certainly represent any
                data type that has less than 256 different values with a single byte. This includes some
                very important and often-used data types including the character data type, boolean data
                type, most enumerated data types, and small integer data types (signed and unsigned),
                just to name a few.
                     Characters on a typical IBM compatible system use the eight bit ASCII/IBM character
                set (see “A: ASCII/IBM Character Set” on page 1345). The 80x86 provides a rich set of
                instructions for manipulating character data. It’s not surprising to find that most byte
                variables in a typical program hold character data.
                    The boolean data type represents only two values: true or false. Therefore, it only
                takes a single bit to represent a boolean value. However, the 80x86 really wants to work
                with data at least eight bits wide. It actually takes extra code to manipulate a single bit
                rather than a whole byte. Therefore, you should use a whole byte to represent a boolean
                value. Most programmers use the value zero to represent false and anything else (typi-
                cally one) to represent true. The 80x86’s zero flag makes testing for zero/not zero very
                easy. Note that this choice of zero or non-zero is mainly for convenience. You could use
                any two different values (or two different sets of values) to represent true and false.
                     Most high level languages that support enumerated data types convert them (inter-
                nally) to unsigned integers. The first item in the list is generally item zero, the second item
                in the list is item one, the third is item two, etc. For example, consider the following Pascal
                enumerated data type:
                colors = (red, blue, green, purple, orange, yellow, white, black);
                Most Pascal compilers will assign the value zero to red, one to blue, two to green, etc.
                     Later, you will see how to actually create your own enumerated data types in assem-
                bly language. All you need to learn now is how to allocate storage for a variable that holds
                an enumerated value. Since it’s unlikely there will be more than 256 items enumerated by
                the data type, you can use a simple byte variable to hold the value. If you have a variable,
                say color of type colors, using the instruction mov color,2 is the same thing as saying
                color:=green in Pascal. (Later, you’ll even learn how to use more meaningful statements
                like mov color,green to assign the color green to the color variable).
                    Of course, if you have a small unsigned integer value (0…255) or small signed integer
                (-128…127) a single byte variable is the best way to go in most cases. Note that most pro-

Page 198
                                                                  Variables and Data Structures

grammers treat all data types except small signed integers as unsigned values. That is,
characters, booleans, enumerated types, and unsigned integers are all usually unsigned
values. In some very special cases you might want to treat a character as a signed value,
but most of the time even characters are unsigned values.
    There are three main statements for declaring byte variables in a program. They are
identifier          db          ?
identifier          byte        ?
and
identifier          sbyte       ?
identifier represents the name of your byte variable. “db” is an older term that predates
MASM 6.x. You will see this directive used quite a bit by other programmers (especially
those who are not using MASM 6.x or later) but Microsoft considers it to be an obsolete
term; you should always use the byte and sbyte declarations instead.
    The byte declaration declares unsigned byte variables. You should use this declaration
for all byte variables except small signed integers. For signed integer values, use the sbyte
(signed byte) directive.
    Once you declare some byte variables with these statements, you may reference those
variables within your program by their names:
i                   db          ?
j                   byte        ?
k                   sbyte       ?
                      .
                      .
                      .
                    mov         i, 0
                    mov         j, 245
                    mov         k, -5
                    mov         al, i
                    mov         j, al
                    etc.
     Although MASM 6.x performs a small amount of type checking, you should not get
the idea that assembly language is a strongly typed language. In fact, MASM 6.x will only
check the values you’re moving around to verify that they will fit in the target location. All
of the following are legal in MASM 6.x:
                    mov         k, 255
                    mov         j, -5
                    mov         i, -127
Since all of these variables are byte-sized variables, and all the associated constants will fit
into eight bits, MASM happily allows each of these statements. Yet if you look at them,
they are logically incorrect. What does it mean to move -5 into an unsigned byte variable?
Since signed byte values must be in the range -128…127, what happens when you store
the value 255 into a signed byte variable? Well, MASM simply converts these values to
their eight bit equivalents (-5 becomes 0FBh, 255 becomes 0FFh [-1], etc.).
    Perhaps a later version of MASM will perform stronger type checking on the values
you shove into these variables, perhaps not. However, you should always keep in mind
that it will always be possible to circumvent this checking. It’s up to you to write your pro-
grams correctly. The assembler won’t help you as much as Pascal or Ada will. Of course,
even if the assembler disallowed these statements, it would still be easy to get around the
type checking. Consider the following sequence:
                  mov      al, -5
                   .
        ; Any number of statements which do not affect AL
                   .
                  mov      j, al




                                                                                      Page 199
Chapter 05

                 There is, unfortunately, no way the assembler is going to be able to tell you that you’re
                 storing an illegal value into j5. The registers, by their very nature, are neither signed nor
                 unsigned. Therefore the assembler will let you store a register into a variable regardless of
                 the value that may be in that register.
                      Although the assembler does not check to see if both operands to an instruction are
                 signed or unsigned, it most certainly checks their size. If the sizes do not agree the assem-
                 bler will complain with an appropriate error message. The following examples are all ille-
                 gal:
                                       mov         i, ax            ;Cannot move 16 bits into eight
                                       mov         i, 300           ;300 won’t fit in eight bits.
                                       mov         k, -130          ;-130 won’t fit into eight bits.
                     You might ask “if the assembler doesn’t really differentiate signed and unsigned val-
                 ues, why bother with them? Why not simply use db all the time?” Well, there are two rea-
                 sons. First, it makes your programs easier to read and understand if you explicitly state
                 (by using byte and sbyte) which variables are signed and which are unsigned. Second, who
                 said anything about the assembler ignoring whether the variables are signed or unsigned?
                 The mov instruction ignores the difference, but there are other instructions that do not.
                      One final point is worth mentioning concerning the declaration of byte variables. In
                 all of the declarations you’ve seen thus far the operand field of the instruction has always
                 contained a question mark. This question mark tells the assembler that the variable
                 should be left uninitialized when DOS loads the program into memory6. You may specify
                 an initial value for the variable, that will be loaded into memory before the program starts
                 executing, by replacing the question mark with your initial value. Consider the following
                 byte variable declarations:
                 i                     db          0
                 j                     byte        255
                 k                     sbyte       -1
                 In this example, the assembler will initialize i, j, and k to zero, 255, and -1, respectively,
                 when the program loads into memory. This fact will prove quite useful later on, especially
                 when discussing tables and arrays. Once again, the assembler only checks the sizes of the
                 operands. It does not check to make sure that the operand for the byte directive is posi-
                 tive or that the value in the operand field of sbyte is in the range -128…127. MASM will
                 allow any value in the range -128…255 in the operand field of any of these statements.
                     In case you get the impression that there isn’t a real reason to use byte vs. sbyte in a
                 program, you should note that while MASM sometimes ignores the differences in these
                 definitions, Microsoft’s CodeView debugger does not. If you’ve declared a variable as a
                 signed value, CodeView will display it as such (including a minus sign, if necessary). On
                 the other hand, CodeView will always display db and byte variables as positive values.



5.3.2        Declaring and using WORD Variables
                     Most 80x86 programs use word values for three things: 16 bit signed integers, 16 bit
                 unsigned integers, and offsets (pointers). Oh sure, you can use word values for lots of
                 other things as well, but these three represent most applications of the word data type.
                 Since the word is the largest data type the 8086, 8088, 80186, 80188, and 80286 can handle,
                 you’ll find that for most programs, the word is the basis for most computations. Of course,
                 the 80386 and later allow 32 bit computations, but many programs do not use these 32 bit
                 instructions since that would limit them to running on 80386 or later CPUs.
                    You use the dw, word, and sword statements to declare word variables. The following
                 examples demonstrate their use:


    5. Actually, for this simple example you could modify the assembler to detect this problem. But it’s easy enough to
    come up with a slightly more complex example where the assembler could not detect the problem on.
    6. DOS actually initializes such variables to zero, but you shouldn’t count on this.


Page 200
                                                                             Variables and Data Structures

           NoSignedWord        dw          ?
           UnsignedWord        word        ?
           SignedWord          sword       ?
           Initialized0        word        0
           InitializedM1       sword       -1
           InitializedBig      word        65535
           InitializedOfs      dw          NoSignedWord
                Most of these declarations are slight modifications of the byte declarations you saw in
           the last section. Of course you may initialize any word variable to a value in the range
           -32768…65535 (the union of the range for signed and unsigned 16 bit constants). The last
           declaration above, however, is new. In this case a label appears in the operand field (spe-
           cifically, the name of the NoSignedWord variable). When a label appears in the operand
           field the assembler will substitute the offset of that label (within the variable’s segment). If
           these were the only declarations in dseg and they appeared in this order, the last declara-
           tion above would initialize InitializedOfs with the value zero since NoSignedWord’s offset is
           zero within the data segment. This form of initialization is quite useful for initializing
           pointers. But more on that subject later.
               The CodeView debugger differentiates dw/word variables and sword variables. It
           always displays the unsigned values as positive integers. On the other hand, it will dis-
           play sword variables as signed values (complete with minus sign, if the value is negative).
           Debugging support is one of the main reasons you’ll want to use word or sword as appro-
           priate.



5.3.3   Declaring and using DWORD Variables
               You may use the dd, dword, and sdword instructions to declare four-byte integers,
           pointers, and other variables types. Such variables will allow values in the range
           -2,147,483,648…4,294,967,295 (the union of the range of signed and unsigned four-byte
           integers). You use these declarations like the word declarations:
           NoSignedDWord       dd          ?
           UnsignedDWord       dword       ?
           SignedDWord         sdword      ?
           InitBig             dword       4000000000
           InitNegative        sdword      -1
           InitPtr             dd          InitBig
           The last example initializes a double word pointer with the segment:offset address of the
           InitBig variable.
                Once again, it’s worth pointing out that the assembler doesn’t check the types of these
           variables when looking at the initialization values. If the value fits into 32 bits, the assem-
           bler will accept it. Size checking, however, is strictly enforced. Since the only 32 bit mov
           instructions on processors earlier than the 80386 are les and lds, you will get an error if you
           attempt to access dword variables on these earlier processors using a mov instruction. Of
           course, even on the 80386 you cannot move a 32 bit variable into a 16 bit register, you must
           use the 32 bit registers. Later, you’ll learn how to manipulate 32 bit variables, even on a 16
           bit processor. Until then, just pretend that you can’t.
               Keep in mind, of course, that CodeView differentiates between dd/dword and sdword.
           This will help you see the actual values your variables have when you’re debugging your
           programs. CodeView only does this, though, if you use the proper declarations for your
           variables. Always use sdword for signed values and dd or dword (dword is best) for unsigned
           values.




                                                                                                 Page 201
Chapter 05


5.3.4        Declaring and using FWORD, QWORD, and TBYTE Variables
                    MASM 6.x also lets you declare six-byte, eight-byte, and ten-byte variables using the
                df/fword, dq/qword, and dt/tbyte statements. Declarations using these statements were origi-
                nally intended for floating point and BCD values. There are better directives for the float-
                ing point variables and you don’t need to concern yourself with the other data types
                you’d use these directives for. The following discussion is for completeness’ sake.
                     The df/fword statement’s main utility is declaring 48 bit pointers for use in 32 bit pro-
                tected mode on the 80386 and later. Although you could use this directive to create an
                arbitrary six byte variable, there are better directives for doing that. You should only use
                this directive for 48 bit far pointers on the 80386.
                     dq/qword lets you declare quadword (eight byte) variables. The original purpose of this
                directive was to let you create 64 bit double precision floating point variables and 64 bit
                integer variables. There are better directives for creating floating point variables. As for 64
                bit integers, you won’t need them very often on the 80x86 CPU (at least, not until Intel
                releases a member of the 80x86 family with 64 bit general purpose registers).
                    The dt/tbyte directives allocate ten bytes of storage. There are two data types indige-
                nous to the 80x87 (math coprocessor) family that use a ten byte data type: ten byte BCD
                values and extended precision (80 bit) floating point values. This text will pretty much
                ignore the BCD data type. As for the floating point type, once again there is a better way to
                do it.



5.3.5        Declaring Floating Point Variables with REAL4, REAL8, and REAL10
                    These are the directives you should use when declaring floating point variables. Like
                dd, dq, and dt these statements reserve four, eight, and ten bytes. The operand fields for
                these statements may contain a question mark (if you don’t want to initialize the variable)
                or it may contain an initial value in floating point form. The following examples demon-
                strate their use:
                x                   real4       1.5
                y                   real8       1.0e-25
                z                   real10      -1.2594e+10
                    Note that the operand field must contain a valid floating point constant using either
                decimal or scientific notation. In particular, pure integer constants are not allowed. The
                assembler will complain if you use an operand like the following:
                x                   real4         1
                To correct this, change the operand field to “1.0”.
                    Please note that it takes special hardware to perform floating point operations (e.g., an
                80x87 chip or an 80x86 with built-in math coprocessor). If such hardware is not available,
                you must write software to perform operations like floating point addition, subtraction,
                multiplication, etc. In particular, you cannot use the 80x86 add instruction to add two
                floating point values. This text will cover floating point arithmetic in a later chapter (see
                “Floating Point Arithmetic” on page 771). Nonetheless, it’s appropriate to discuss how to
                declare floating point variables in the chapter on data structures.
                    MASM also lets you use dd, dq, and dt to declare floating point variables (since these
                directives reserve the necessary four, eight, or ten bytes of space). You can even initialize
                such variables with floating point constants in the operand field. But there are two major
                drawbacks to declaring variables this way. First, as with bytes, words, and double words,
                the CodeView debugger will only display your floating point variables properly if you
                use the real4, real8, or real10 directives. If you use dd, dq, or dt, CodeView will display your
                values as four, eight, or ten byte unsigned integers. Another, potentially bigger, problem
                with using dd, dq, and dt is that they allow both integer and floating point constant initial-
                izers (remember, real4, real8, and real10 do not). Now this might seem like a good feature

Page 202
                                                                              Variables and Data Structures

            at first glance. However, the integer representation for the value one is not the same as the
            floating point representation for the value 1.0. So if you accidentally enter the value “1” in
            the operand field when you really meant “1.0”, the assembler would happily digest this
            and then give you incorrect results. Hence, you should always use the real4, real8, and
            real10 statements to declare floating point variables.



5.4   Creating Your Own Type Names with TYPEDEF
                 Let’s say that you simply do not like the names that Microsoft decided to use for
            declaring byte, word, dword, real, and other variables. Let’s say that you prefer Pascal’s
            naming convention or, perhaps, C’s naming convention. You want to use terms like inte-
            ger, float, double, char, boolean, or whatever. If this were Pascal you could redefine the names
            in the type section of the program. With C you could use a “#define ” or a typedef state-
            ment to accomplish the task. Well, MASM 6.x has it’s own typedef statement that also lets
            you create aliases of these names. The following example demonstrates how to set up
            some Pascal compatible names in your assembly language programs:
            integer             typedef       sword
            char                typedef       byte
            boolean             typedef       byte
            float               typedef       real4
            colors              typedef       byte
                Now you can declare your variables with more meaningful statements like:
            i                   integer       ?
            ch                  char          ?
            FoundIt             boolean       ?
            x                   float         ?
            HouseColor          colors        ?
                 If you are an Ada, C, or FORTRAN programmer (or any other language, for that mat-
            ter), you can pick type names you’re more comfortable with. Of course, this doesn’t
            change how the 80x86 or MASM reacts to these variables one iota, but it does let you cre-
            ate programs that are easier to read and understand since the type names are more indica-
            tive of the actual underlying types.
                Note that CodeView still respects the underlying data type. If you define integer to be
            an sword type, CodeView will display variables of type integer as signed values. Likewise,
            if you define float to mean real4, CodeView will still properly display float variables as
            four-byte floating point values.



5.5   Pointer Data Types
                 Some people refer to pointers as scalar data types, others refer to them as composite
            data types. This text will treat them as scalar data types even though they exhibit some
            tendencies of both scalar and composite data types (for a complete description of compos-
            ite data types, see “Composite Data Types” on page 206).
                Of course, the place to start is with the question “What is a pointer?” Now you’ve
            probably experienced pointers first hand in the Pascal, C, or Ada programming languages
            and you’re probably getting worried right now. Almost everyone has a real bad experi-
            ence when they first encounter pointers in a high level language. Well, fear not! Pointers
            are actually easier to deal with in assembly language. Besides, most of the problems you
            had with pointers probably had nothing to do with pointers, but rather with the linked list
            and tree data structures you were trying to implement with them. Pointers, on the other
            hand, have lots of uses in assembly language that have nothing to do with linked lists,
            trees, and other scary data structures. Indeed, simple data structures like arrays and
            records often involve the use of pointers. So if you’ve got some deep-rooted fear about



                                                                                                  Page 203
Chapter 05

             pointers, well forget everything you know about them. You’re going to learn how great
             pointers really are.
                  Probably the best place to start is with the definition of a pointer. Just exactly what is a
             pointer, anyway? Unfortunately, high level languages like Pascal tend to hide the simplic-
             ity of pointers behind a wall of abstraction. This added complexity (which exists for good
             reason, by the way) tends to frighten programmers because they don’t understand what’s
             going on.
                Now if you’re afraid of pointers, well, let’s just ignore them for the time being and
             work with an array. Consider the following array declaration in Pascal:
                                  M: array [0..1023] of integer;
                 Even if you don’t know Pascal, the concept here is pretty easy to understand. M is an
             array with 1024 integers in it, indexed from M[0] to M[1023]. Each one of these array ele-
             ments can hold an integer value that is independent of all the others. In other words, this
             array gives you 1024 different integer variables each of which you refer to by number (the
             array index) rather than by name.
                 If you encountered a program that had the statement M[0]:=100 you probably
             wouldn’t have to think at all about what is happening with this statement. It is storing the
             value 100 into the first element of the array M. Now consider the following two state-
             ments:
                                  i := 0; (* Assume “i” is an integer variable *)
                                  M [i] := 100;
             You should agree, without too much hesitation, that these two statements perform the
             same exact operation as M[0]:=100;. Indeed, you’re probably willing to agree that you can
             use any integer expression in the range 0…1023 as an index into this array. The following
             statements still perform the same operation as our single assignment to index zero:
                                  i   := 5;                  (* assume all variables are integers*)
                                  j   := 10;
                                  k   := 50;
                                  m   [i*j-k] := 100;
             “Okay, so what’s the point?” you’re probably thinking. “Anything that produces an inte-
             ger in the range 0…1023 is legal. So what?” Okay, how about the following:
                                  M [1] := 0;
                                  M [ M [1] ] := 100;
             Whoa! Now that takes a few moments to digest. However, if you take it slowly, it makes
             sense and you’ll discover that these two instructions perform the exact same operation
             you’ve been doing all along. The first statement stores zero into array element M[1]. The
             second statement fetches the value of M[1], which is an integer so you can use it as an array
             index into M, and uses that value (zero) to control where it stores the value 100.
                  If you’re willing to accept the above as reasonable, perhaps bizarre, but usable none-
             theless, then you’ll have no problems with pointers. Because m[1] is a pointer! Well, not
             really, but if you were to change “M” to “memory” and treat this array as all of memory,
             this is the exact definition of a pointer.
                 A pointer is simply a memory location whose value is the address (or index, if you
             prefer) of some other memory location. Pointers are very easy to declare and use in an
             assembly language program. You don’t even have to worry about array indices or any-
             thing like that. In fact, the only complication you’re going to run into is that the 80x86 sup-
             ports two kinds of pointers: near pointers and far pointers.
                 A near pointer is a 16 bit value that provides an offset into a segment. It could be any
             segment but you will generally use the data segment (dseg in SHELL.ASM). If you have a
             word variable p that contains 1000h, then p “points” at memory location 1000h in dseg. To
             access the word that p points at, you could use code like the following:
                                  mov        bx, p           ;Load BX with pointer.
                                  mov        ax, [bx]        ;Fetch data that p points at.


Page 204
                                                                                       Variables and Data Structures
                  By loading the value of p into bx this code loads the value 1000h into bx (assuming p
              contains 1000h and, therefore, points at memory location 1000h in dseg). The second
              instruction above loads the ax register with the word starting at the location whose offset
              appears in bx. Since bx now contains 1000h, this will load ax from locations DS:1000 and
              DS:1001.
                  Why not just load ax directly from location 1000h using an instruction like
              mov ax,ds:[1000h]? Well, there are lots of reasons. But the primary reason is that this single
              instruction always loads ax from location 1000h. Unless you are willing to mess around
              with self-modifying code, you cannot change the location from which it loads ax. The pre-
              vious two instructions, however, always load ax from the location that p points at. This is
              very easy to change under program control, without using self-modifying code. In fact,
              the simple instruction mov p,2000h will cause those two instructions above to load ax from
              memory location DS:2000 the next time they execute. Consider the following instructions:
                                 lea      bx, i                   ;This can actually be done with
                                 mov      p, bx                   ; a single instruction as you’ll
                                  .                               ; see in Chapter Eight.
                                  .
                       < Some code that skips over the            next two instructions >

                                     lea         bx, j            ;Assume the above code skips these
                                     mov         p, bx            ; two instructions, that you get
                                      .                           ; here by jumping to this point from
                                      .                           ; somewhere else.
                                     mov         bx, p            ;Assume both code paths above wind
                                     mov         ax, [bx]         ; up down here.
                   This short example demonstrates two execution paths through the program. The first
              path loads the variable p with the address of the variable i (remember, lea loads bx with the
              offset of the second operand). The second path through the code loads p with the address
              of the variable j. Both execution paths converge on the last two mov instructions that load
              ax with i or j depending upon which execution path was taken. In many respects, this is
              like a parameter to a procedure in a high level language like Pascal. Executing the same
              instructions accesses different variables depending on whose address (i or j) winds up in
              p.
                  Sixteen bit near pointers are small, fast, and the 80x86 provides efficient access using
              them. Unfortunately, they have one very serious drawback – you can only access 64K of
              data (one segment) when using near pointers7. Far pointers overcome this limitation at
              the expense of being 32 bits long. However, far pointers let you access any piece of data
              anywhere in the memory space. For this reason, and the fact that the UCR Standard
              Library uses far pointers exclusively, this text will use far pointers most of the time. But
              keep in mind that this is a decision based on trying to keep things simple. Code that uses
              near pointers rather than far pointers will be shorter and faster.
                   To access data referenced by a 32 bit pointer, you will need to load the offset portion
              (L.O. word) of the pointer into bx, bp, si, or di and the segment portion into a segment reg-
              ister (typically es). Then you could access the object using the register indirect addressing
              mode. Since the les instruction is so convenient for this operation, it is the perfect choice
              for loading es and one of the above four registers with a pointer value. The following sam-
              ple code stores the value in al into the byte pointed at by the far pointer p:
                                     les         bx, p            ;Load p into ES:BX
                                     mov         es:[bx], al      ;Store away AL

                  Since near pointers are 16 bits long and far pointers are 32 bits long, you could simply
              use the dw/word and dd/dword directives to allocate storage for your pointers (pointers are
              inherently unsigned, so you wouldn’t normally use sword or sdword to declare a pointer).


7. Technically, this isn’t true. A single pointer is limited to accessing data in one particular segment at a time, but
you could have several near pointers each pointing at data in different segments. Unfortunately, you need to keep
track of all this yourself and it gets out of hand very quickly as the number of pointers in your program increases.


                                                                                                             Page 205
Chapter 05
                However, there is a much better way to do this by using the typedef statement. Consider
                the following general forms:
                typename             typedef     near ptr basetype
                typename             typedef     far ptr basetype
                In these two examples typename represents the name of the new type you’re creating while
                basetype is the name of the type you want to create a pointer for. Let’s look at some specific
                examples:
                nbytptr              typedef     near ptr byte
                fbytptr              typedef     far ptr byte
                colorsptr            typedef     far ptr colors
                wptr                 typedef     near ptr word
                intptr               typedef     near ptr integer
                intHandle            typedef     near ptr intptr
                (these declarations assume that you’ve previously defined the types colors and integer with
                the typedef statement). The typedef statements with the near ptr operands produce 16 bit
                near pointers. Those with the far ptr operands produce 32 bit far pointers. MASM 6.x
                ignores the base type supplied after the near ptr or far ptr. However, CodeView uses the
                base type to display the object a pointer refers to in its correct format.
                   Note that you can use any type as the base type for a pointer. As the last example
                above demonstrates, you can even define a pointer to another pointer (a handle). Code-
                View would properly display the object a variable of type intHandle points at as an
                address.
                      With the above types, you can now generate pointer variables as follows:
                bytestr              nbytptr       ?
                bytestr2             fbytptr       ?
                CurrentColor         colorsptr     ?
                CurrentItem          wptr          ?
                LastInt              intptr        ?
                    Of course, you can initialize these pointers at assembly time if you know where they
                are going to point when the program first starts running. For example, you could initialize
                the bytestr variable above with the offset of MyString using the following declaration:
                bytestr              nbytptr     MyString



5.6     Composite Data Types
                     Composite data types are those that are built up from other (generally scalar) data
                types. An array is a good example of a composite data type – it is an aggregate of elements
                all the same type. Note that a composite data type need not be composed of scalar data
                types, there are arrays of arrays for example, but ultimately you can decompose a com-
                posite data type into some primitive, scalar, types.
                    This section will cover two of the more common composite data types: arrays and
                records. It’s a little premature to discuss some of the more advanced composite data types.



5.6.1        Arrays
                    Arrays are probably the most commonly used composite data type. Yet most begin-
                ning programmers have a very weak understanding of how arrays operate and their asso-
                ciated efficiency trade-offs. It’s surprising how many novice (and even advanced!)
                programmers view arrays from a completely different perspective once they learn how to
                deal with arrays at the machine level.
                    Abstractly, an array is an aggregate data type whose members (elements) are all the
                same type. Selection of a member from the array is by an integer index8. Different indices
                select unique elements of the array. This text assumes that the integer indices are contigu-


Page 206
                                                                                    Variables and Data Structures


                                     A: array [0..4] of sometype ;

                                 A[0]   A[1]    A[2]    A[3]    A[4]



               Low memory                                                         High memory
               addresses                    Base address of A                     addresses

Figure 5.1 Single Dimension Array Implementation

                ous (though it is by no means required). That is, if the number x is a valid index into the
                array and y is also a valid index, with x < y, then all i such that x < i < y are valid indices
                into the array.
                     Whenever you apply the indexing operator to an array, the result is the specific array
                element chosen by that index. For example, A[i] chooses the ith element from array A. Note
                that there is no formal requirement that element i be anywhere near element i+1 in mem-
                ory. As long as A[i] always refers to the same memory location and A[i+1] always refers to
                its corresponding location (and the two are different), the definition of an array is satis-
                fied.
                   In this text, arrays occupy contiguous locations in memory. An array with five ele-
                ments will appear in memory as shown in Figure 5.1.
                     The base address of an array is the address of the first element on the array and always
                appears in the lowest memory location. The second array element directly follows the first
                in memory, the third element follows the second, etc. Note that there is no requirement
                that the indices start at zero. They may start with any number as long as they are contigu-
                ous. However, for the purposes of discussion, it’s easier to discuss accessing array ele-
                ments if the first index is zero. This text generally begins most arrays at index zero unless
                there is a good reason to do otherwise. However, this is for consistency only. There is no
                efficiency benefit one way or another to starting the array index at some value other than
                zero.
                     To access an element of an array, you need a function that converts an array index into
                the address of the indexed element. For a single dimension array, this function is very sim-
                ple. It is
                Element_Address = Base_Address + ((Index - Initial_Index) * Element_Size)
                where Initial_Index is the value of the first index in the array (which you can ignore if zero)
                and the value Element_Size is the size, in bytes, of an individual element of the array.



5.6.1.1    Declaring Arrays in Your Data Segment
                    Before you access elements of an array, you need to set aside storage for that array.
                Fortunately, array declarations build on the declarations you’ve seen so far. To allocate n
                elements in an array, you would use a declaration like the following:
                arrayname            basetype       n dup (?)
                Arrayname is the name of the array variable and basetype is the type of an element of that
                array. This sets aside storage for the array. To obtain the base address of the array, just use
                arrayname.
                    The n dup (?) operand tells the assembler to duplicate the object inside the parenthe-
                ses n times. Since a question mark appears inside the parentheses, the definition above



   8. Or some value whose underlying representation is integer, such as character, enumerated, and boolean types.


                                                                                                         Page 207
Chapter 05

             would create n occurrences of an uninitialized value. Now let’s look at some specific
             examples:
             CharArray            char        128 dup (?)                   ;array[0..127] of char
             IntArray             integer     8 dup (?)                     ;array[0..7] of integer
             BytArray             byte        10 dup (?)                    ;array[0..9] of byte
             PtrArray             dword       4 dup (?)                     ;array[0..3] of dword
             The first two examples, of course, assume that you’ve used the typedef statement to define
             the char and integer data types.
                 These examples all allocate storage for uninitialized arrays. You may also specify that
             the elements of the arrays be initialized to a single value using declarations like the fol-
             lowing:
             RealArray            real4       8 dup (1.0)
             IntegerAry           integer     8 dup (1)
             These definitions both create arrays with eight elements. The first definition initializes
             each four-byte real value to 1.0, the second declaration initializes each integer element to
             one.
                 This initialization mechanism is fine if you want each element of the array to have the
             same value. What if you want to initialize each element of the array with a (possibly) dif-
             ferent value? Well, that is easily handled as well. The variable declaration statements
             you’ve seen thus far offer yet another initialization form:
             name                 type        value1, value2, value3, …, valuen
                 This form allocates n variables of type type. It initializes the first item to value1, the sec-
             ond item to value2, etc. So by simply enumerating each value in the operand field, you can
             create an array with the desired initial values. In the following integer array, for example,
             each element contains the square of its index:
             Squares              integer     0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100
                 If your array has more elements than will fit on one line, there are several ways to con-
             tinue the array onto the next line. The most straight-forward method is to use another
             integer statement but without a label:
             Squares              integer     0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100
                                  integer     121, 144, 169, 196, 225, 256, 289, 324
                                  integer     361, 400
                 Another option, that is better in some circumstances, is to use a backslash at the end of
             each line to tell MASM 6.x to continue reading data on the next line:
             Squares              integer     0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, \
                                              121, 144, 169, 196, 225, 256, 289, 324, \
                                              361, 400
                 Of course, if your array has several thousand elements in it, typing them all in will not
             be very much fun. Most arrays initialized this way have no more than a couple hundred
             entries, and generally far less than 100.
                 You need to learn about one final technique for initializing single dimension arrays
             before moving on. Consider the following declaration:
             BigArray             word        256 dup (0,1,2,3)
                 This array has 1024 elements, not 256. The n dup (xxxx) operand tells MASM to dupli-
             cate xxxx n times, not create an array with n elements. If xxxx consists of a single item, then
             the dup operator will create an n element array. However, if xxxx contains two items sepa-
             rated by a comma, the dup operator will create an array with 2*n elements. If xxxx contains
             three items separated by commas, the dup operator creates an array with 3*n items, and so
             on. Since there are four items in the parentheses above, the dup operator creates 256*4 or
             1024 items in the array. The values in the array will initially be 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3
             ...



Page 208
                                                                              Variables and Data Structures

               You will see some more possibilities with the dup operator when looking at multidi-
            mensional arrays a little later.



5.6.1.2   Accessing Elements of a Single Dimension Array
                To access an element of a zero-based array, you can use the simplified formula:
                Element_Address = Base_Address + index * Element_Size
                For the Base_Address entry you can use the name of the array (since MASM associates
            the address of the first operand with the label). The Element_Size entry is the number of
            bytes for each array element. If the object is an array of bytes, the Element_Size field is one
            (resulting in a very simple computation). If each element of the array is a word (or integer,
            or other two-byte type) then Element_Size is two. And so on. To access an element of the
            Squares array in the previous section, you’d use the formula:
                Element_Address = Squares + index*2
            The 80x86 code equivalent to the statement AX:=Squares[index] is
                                mov        bx, index
                                add        bx, bx                       ;Sneaky way to compute 2*bx
                                mov        ax, Squares [bx]
                There are two important things to notice here. First of all, this code uses the add
            instruction rather than the mul instruction to compute 2*index. The main reason for choos-
            ing add is that it was more convenient (remember, mul doesn’t work with constants and it
            only operates on the ax register). It turns out that add is a lot faster than mul on many pro-
            cessors, but since you probably didn’t know that, it wasn’t an overriding consideration in
            the choice of this instruction.
                The second thing to note about this instruction sequence is that it does not explicitly
            compute the sum of the base address plus the index times two. Instead, it relies on the
            indexed addressing mode to implicitly compute this sum. The instruction
            mov ax, Squares[bx] loads ax from location Squares+bx which is the base address plus
            index*2 (since bx contains index*2). Sure, you could have used
                                lea        ax, Squares
                                add        bx, ax
                                mov        ax, [bx]
            in place of the last instruction, but why use three instructions where one will do the same
            job? This is a good example of why you should know your addressing modes inside and
            out. Choosing the proper addressing mode can reduce the size of your program, thereby
            speeding it up.
                The indexed addressing mode on the 80x86 is a natural for accessing elements of a sin-
            gle dimension array. Indeed, it’s syntax even suggests an array access. The only thing to
            keep in mind is that you must remember to multiply the index by the size of an element.
            Failure to do so will produce incorrect results.
                If you are using an 80386 or later, you can take advantage of the scaled indexed
            addressing mode to speed up accessing an array element even more. Consider the follow-
            ing statements:
                                mov        ebx, index                   ;Assume a 32 bit value.
                                mov        ax, Squares [ebx*2]
                This brings the instruction count down to two instructions. You’ll soon see that two
            instructions aren’t necessarily faster than three instructions, but hopefully you get the
            idea. Knowing your addressing modes can surely help.
                Before moving on to multidimensional arrays, a couple of additional points about
            addressing modes and arrays are in order. The above sequences work great if you only
            access a single element from the Squares array. However, if you access several different
            elements from the array within a short section of code, and you can afford to dedicate

                                                                                                  Page 209
Chapter 05

                another register to the operation, you can certainly shorten your code and, perhaps, speed
                it up as well. The mov ax,Squares[BX] instruction is four bytes long (assuming you need a
                two-byte displacement to hold the offset to Squares in the data segment). You can reduce
                this to a two byte instruction by using the base/indexed addressing mode as follows:
                                    lea        bx,   Squares
                                    mov        si,   index
                                    add        si,   si
                                    mov        ax,   [bx][si]
                     Now bx contains the base address and si contains the index*2 value. Of course, this
                just replaced a single four-byte instruction with a three-byte and a two-byte instruction,
                hardly a good trade-off. However, you do not have to reload bx with the base address of
                Squares for the next access. The following sequence is one byte shorter than the compara-
                ble sequence that doesn’t load the base address into bx:
                                    lea        bx,   Squares
                                    mov        si,   index
                                    add        si,   si
                                    mov        ax,   [bx][si]
                                     .
                                     .                          ;Assumption: BX is left alone
                                     .                          ; through this code.
                                    mov        si, index2
                                    add        si, si
                                    mov        cx, [bx][si]
                      Of course the more accesses to Squares you make without reloading bx, the greater
                your savings will be. Tricky little code sequences such as this one sometimes pay off hand-
                somely. However, the savings depend entirely on which processor you’re using. Code
                sequences that run faster on an 8086 might actually run slower on an 80486 (and vice
                versa). Unfortunately, if speed is what you’re after there are no hard and fast rules. In fact,
                it is very difficult to predict the speed of most instructions on the simple 8086, even more
                so on processors like the 80486 and Pentium/80586 that offer pipelining, on-chip caches,
                and even superscalar operation.



5.6.2        Multidimensional Arrays
                    The 80x86 hardware can easily handle single dimension arrays. Unfortunately, there is
                no magic addressing mode that lets you easily access elements of multidimensional
                arrays. That’s going to take some work and lots of instructions.
                    Before discussing how to declare or access multidimensional arrays, it would be a
                good idea to figure out how to implement them in memory. The first problem is to figure
                out how to store a multi-dimensional object into a one-dimensional memory space.
                    Consider for a moment a Pascal array of the form A:array[0..3,0..3] of char. This array
                contains 16 bytes organized as four rows of four characters. Somehow you’ve got to draw
                a correspondence with each of the 16 bytes in this array and 16 contiguous bytes in main
                memory. Figure 5.2 shows one way to do this.
                    The actual mapping is not important as long as two things occur: (1) each element
                maps to a unique memory location (that is, no two entries in the array occupy the same
                memory locations) and (2) the mapping is consistent. That is, a given element in the array
                always maps to the same memory location. So what you really need is a function with two
                input parameters (row and column) that produces an offset into a linear array of sixteen
                bytes.
                    Now any function that satisfies the above constraints will work fine. Indeed, you
                could randomly choose a mapping as long as it was unique. However, what you really
                want is a mapping that is efficient to compute at run time and works for any size array
                (not just 4x4 or even limited to two dimensions). While there are a large number of possi-



Page 210
                                                                               Variables and Data Structures



                                                                    Memory




                               0 1 2 3
                         0
                         1
                         2
                         3

Figure 5.2 Mapping a 4 x 4 Array to Memory



                                                               Memory
                      A:array [0..3,0..3] of char;
                                                                         15   A [3,3 ]
                                                                         14   A [3,2 ]
                           0 1 2 3                                       13
                                                                         12
                                                                              A [3,1 ]
                                                                              A [3,0 ]
                   0       0     1    2    3                             11
                                                                         10
                                                                              A [2,3 ]
                                                                              A [2,2 ]
                   1       4     5    6    7                             9
                                                                         8
                                                                              A[2 ,1]
                                                                              A[2 ,0]
                   2       8     9 10 11                                 7
                                                                         6
                                                                              A[1 ,3]
                                                                              A[1 ,2]
                   3       12 13 14 15                                   5
                                                                         4
                                                                              A[1 ,1]
                                                                              A[1 ,0]
                                                                         3    A[0 ,3]
                                                                         2    A[0 ,2]
                                                                         1    A[0 ,1]
                                                                         0    A[0 ,0]


Figure 5.3 Row Major Element Ordering

              ble functions that fit this bill, there are two functions in particular that most programmers
              and most high level languages use: row major ordering and column major ordering.



5.6.2.1   Row Major Ordering
                  Row major ordering assigns successive elements, moving across the rows and then
              down the columns, to successive memory locations. The mapping is best described in
              Figure 5.3.
                  Row major ordering is the method employed by most high level programming lan-
              guages including Pascal, C, Ada, Modula-2, etc. It is very easy to implement and easy to
              use in machine language (especially within a debugger such as CodeView). The conver-
              sion from a two-dimensional structure to a linear array is very intuitive. You start with the



                                                                                                   Page 211
Chapter 05



             Low Addresses                                                       High Addresses

              0     1     2    3      4     5     6    7     8     9 10 11     12 13 14 15



              0     1     2    3
              4     5     6    7
              8     9 10 11
              12 13 14 15
 Figure 5.4 Another View of Row Major Ordering for a 4x4 Array

                  first row (row number zero) and then concatenate the second row to its end. You then con-
                  catenate the third row to the end of the list, then the fourth row, etc. (see Figure 5.4).
                      For those who like to think in terms of program code, the following nested Pascal loop
                  also demonstrates how row major ordering works:
                  index := 0;
                  for colindex := 0 to 3 do
                         for rowindex := 0 to 3 do
                         begin
                                          memory [index] := rowmajor [colindex][rowindex];
                                          index := index + 1;
                           end;
                      The important thing to note from this code, that applies across the board to row major
                  order no matter how many dimensions it has, is that the rightmost index increases the
                  fastest. That is, as you allocate successive memory locations you increment the rightmost
                  index until you reach the end of the current row. Upon reaching the end, you reset the
                  index back to the beginning of the row and increment the next successive index by one
                  (that is, move down to the next row.). This works equally well for any number of dimen-
                  sions9. The following Pascal segment demonstrates row major organization for a 4x4x4
                  array:
                  index := 0;
                  for depthindex := 0 to 3 do
                         for colindex := 0 to 3 do
                            for rowindex := 0 to 3 do begin
                                          memory [index] := rowmajor [depthindex][colindex][rowindex];
                                          index := index + 1;
                               end;
                       The actual function that converts a list of index values into an offset doesn’t involve
                  loops or much in the way of fancy computations. Indeed, it’s a slight modification of the
                  formula for computing the address of an element of a single dimension array. The formula
                  to compute the offset for a two-dimension row major ordered array declared as
                   A:array [0..3,0..3] of integer is
                  Element_Address = Base_Address + (colindex * row_size + rowindex) * Element_Size
                       As usual, Base_Address is the address of the first element of the array (A[0][0] in this
                  case) and Element_Size is the size of an individual element of the array, in bytes. Colindex is
                  the leftmost index, rowindex is the rightmost index into the array. Row_size is the number of


    9. By the way, the number of dimensions of an array is its arity.


Page 212
                                                                       Variables and Data Structures

elements in one row of the array (four, in this case, since each row has four elements).
Assuming Element_Size is one, This formula computes the following offsets from the base
address:
    Column Index                Row Index              Offset into Array
         0                           0                          0
         0                           1                          1
         0                           2                          2
         0                           3                          3
         1                           0                          4
         1                           1                          5
         1                           2                          6
         1                           3                          7
         2                           0                          8
         2                           1                          9
         2                           2                          10
         2                           3                          11
         3                           0                          12
         3                           1                          13
         3                           2                          14
         3                           3                          15
     For a three-dimensional array, the formula to compute the offset into memory is the
following:
Address = Base + ((depthindex*col_size+colindex) * row_size + rowindex) *
Element_Size
Col_size is the number of items in a column, row_size is the number of items in a row. In
Pascal, if you’ve declared the array as “A:array [i..j] [k..l] [m..n] of type;” then row_size is equal
to n-m+1 and col_size is equal to l-k+1.
   For a four dimensional array, declared as “A:array [g..h] [i..j] [k..l] [m..n] of type;” the for-
mula for computing the address of an array element is
Address =
Base + (((LeftIndex * depth_size + depthindex)*col_size+colindex) * row_size +
rowindex) * Element_Size
Depth_size is equal to i-j+1, col_size and row_size are the same as before. LeftIndex repre-
sents the value of the leftmost index.
    By now you’re probably beginning to see a pattern. There is a generic formula that
will compute the offset into memory for an array with any number of dimensions, how-
ever, you’ll rarely use more than four.
    Another convenient way to think of row major arrays is as arrays of arrays. Consider
the following single dimension array definition:
                                A: array [0..3] of sometype;
Assume that sometype is the type “sometype = array [0..3] of char;”.
     A is a single dimension array. Its individual elements happen to be arrays, but you can
safely ignore that for the time being. The formula to compute the address of an element of
a single dimension array is
Element_Address = Base + Index * Element_Size
     In this case Element_Size happens to be four since each element of A is an array of four
characters. So what does this formula compute? It computes the base address of each row
in this 4x4 array of characters (see Figure 5.5).
   Of course, once you compute the base address of a row, you can reapply the single
dimension formula to get the address of a particular element. While this doesn’t affect the
computation at all, conceptually it’s probably a little easier to deal with several single
dimension computations rather than a complex multidimensional array element address
computation.


                                                                                            Page 213
Chapter 05



                                                                   (A[0]) [0]
                                                                   (A[0]) [1]
                                                                   (A[0]) [2]
                                                                   (A[0]) [3]

                               A[0]     0     1     2     3

                               A[1]     4     5     6     7
                                                                   Each element
                                                                   of A is four
                               A[2]     8     9 10 11              bytes long.

                               A[3]     12 13 14 15
 Figure 5.5 Viewing a 4x4 Array as an Array of Arrays

                    Consider a Pascal array defined as “A:array [0..3] [0..3] [0..3] [0..3] [0..3] of char;” You can
                view this five-dimension array as a single dimension array of arrays:
                type
                                      OneD = array [0..3] of char;
                                      TwoD = array [0..3] of OneD;
                                      ThreeD = array [0..3] of TwoD;
                                      FourD = array [0..3] of ThreeD;
                var
                                      A : array [0..3] of FourD;
                     The size of OneD is four bytes. Since TwoD contains four OneD arrays, its size is 16
                bytes. Likewise, ThreeD is four TwoDs, so it is 64 bytes long. Finally, FourD is four ThreeDs,
                so it is 256 bytes long. To compute the address of “A [b] [c] [d] [e] [f]” you could use the fol-
                lowing steps:
                         •   Compute the address of A [b] as “Base + b * size”. Here size is 256 bytes.
                             Use this result as the new base address in the next computation.
                         •   Compute the address of A [b] [c] by the formula “Base + c*size”, where
                             Base is the value obtained immediately above and size is 64. Use the
                             result as the new base in the next computation.
                         •   Compute the address of A [b] [c] [d] by “Base + d*size” with Base coming
                             from the above computation and size being 16.
                         •   Compute the address of A [b] [c] [d] [e] with the formula “Base + e*size”
                             with Base from above and size being four. Use this value as the base for
                             the next computation.
                         •   Finally, compute the address of A [b] [c] [d] [e] [f] using the formula “Base
                             + f*size” where base comes from the above computation and size is one
                             (obviously you can simply ignore this final multiplication). The result you
                             obtain at this point is the address of the desired element.
                     Not only is this scheme easier to deal with than the fancy formulae from above, but it
                is easier to compute (using a single loop) as well. Suppose you have two arrays initialized
                as follows
                         A1 = {256, 64, 16, 4, 1}   and       A2 = {b, c, d, e, f}
                then the Pascal code to perform the element address computation becomes:
                                      for i := 0 to 4 do
                                               base := base + A1[i] * A2[i];
                Presumably base contains the base address of the array before executing this loop. Note
                that you can easily extend this code to any number of dimensions by simply initializing
                A1 and A2 appropriately and changing the ending value of the for loop.


Page 214
                                                                              Variables and Data Structures



                                                              Memory
                     A:array [0..3,0..3] of char;
                                                                        15   A [3,3 ]
                                                                        14   A [2,3 ]
                          0 1 2 3                                       13
                                                                        12
                                                                             A [1,3 ]
                                                                             A [0,3 ]
                  0       0     1    2    3                             11
                                                                        10
                                                                             A [3,2 ]
                                                                             A [2,2 ]
                  1       4     5    6    7                             9
                                                                        8
                                                                             A[1 ,2]
                                                                             A[0 ,2]
                  2       8     9 10 11                                 7
                                                                        6
                                                                             A[3 ,1]
                                                                             A[2 ,1]
                  3       12 13 14 15                                   5
                                                                        4
                                                                             A[1 ,1]
                                                                             A[0 ,1]
                                                                        3    A[3 ,0]
                                                                        2    A[2 ,0]
                                                                        1    A[1 ,0]
                                                                        0    A[0 ,0]


Figure 5.6 Column Major Element Ordering

                 As it turns out, the computational overhead for a loop like this is too great to consider
             in practice. You would only use an algorithm like this if you needed to be able to specify
             the number of dimensions at run time. Indeed, one of the main reasons you won’t find
             higher dimension arrays in assembly language is that assembly language displays the
             inefficiencies associated with such access. It’s easy to enter something like “A [b,c,d,e,f]”
             into a Pascal program, not realizing what the compiler is doing with the code. Assembly
             language programmers are not so cavalier – they see the mess you wind up with when
             you use higher dimension arrays. Indeed, good assembly language programmers try to
             avoid two dimension arrays and often resort to tricks in order to access data in such an
             array when its use becomes absolutely mandatory. But more on that a little later.



5.6.2.2   Column Major Ordering
                 Column major ordering is the other function frequently used to compute the address
             of an array element. FORTRAN and various dialects of BASIC (e.g., Microsoft) use this
             method to index arrays.
                 In row major ordering the rightmost index increased the fastest as you moved
             through consecutive memory locations. In column major ordering the leftmost index
             increases the fastest. Pictorially, a column major ordered array is organized as shown in
             Figure 5.6.
                 The formulae for computing the address of an array element when using column
             major ordering is very similar to that for row major ordering. You simply reverse the
             indexes and sizes in the computation:
             For a two-dimension column major array:
             Element_Address = Base_Address + (rowindex * col_size + colindex) * Element_Size
             For a three-dimension column major array:
             Address = Base + ((rowindex*col_size+colindex) * depth_size + depthindex) *
             Element_Size
             For a four-dimension column major array:
             Address = Base + (((rowindex * col_size + colindex)*depth_size+depthindex) *
             Left_size + Leftindex) * Element_Size



                                                                                                  Page 215
Chapter 05

                     The single Pascal loop provided for row major access remains unchanged (to access
                A [b] [c] [d] [e] [f]):
                                          for i := 0 to 4 do
                                                   base := base + A1[i] * A2[i];
                Likewise, the initial values of the A1 array remain unchanged:
                           A1 = {256, 64, 16, 4, 1}
                The only thing that needs to change is the initial values for the A2 array, and all you have
                to do here is reverse the order of the indices:
                           A2 = {f, e, d, c, b}



5.6.2.3      Allocating Storage for Multidimensional Arrays
                    If you have an m x n array, it will have m * n elements and require m*n*Element_Size
                bytes of storage. To allocate storage for an array you must reserve this amount of memory.
                As usual, there are several different ways of accomplishing this task. This text will try to
                take the approach that is easiest to read and understand in your programs.
                     Reconsider the dup operator for reserving storage. n dup (xxxx) replicates xxxx n times.
                As you saw earlier, this dup operator allows not just one, but several items within the
                parentheses and it duplicates everything inside the specified number of times. In fact, the
                dup operator allows anything that you might normally expect to find in the operand field
                of a byte statement including additional occurrences of the DUP operator. Consider the follow-
                ing statement:
                A                         byte      4 dup (4 dup (?))
                     The first dup operator repeats everything inside the parentheses four times. Inside
                the parentheses the 4 DUP (?) operation tells MASM to set aside storage for four bytes.
                Four copies of four bytes yields 16 bytes, the number necessary for a 4 x 4 array. Of course,
                to reserve storage for this array you could have just as easily used the statement:
                A                         byte      16 dup (?)
                Either way the assembler is going to set aside 16 contiguous bytes in memory. As far as the
                80x86 is concerned, there is no difference between these two forms. On the other hand, the
                former version provides a better indication that A is a 4 x 4 array than the latter version.
                The latter version looks like a single dimension array with 16 elements.
                    You can very easily extend this concept to arrays of higher arity as well. The declara-
                tion for a three dimension array, A:array [0..2, 0..3, 0..4] of integer might be
                A                         integer   3 dup (4 dup (5 dup (?)))
                (of course, you will need the integer typedef word statement in your program for this to
                work.)
                    As was the case with single dimension arrays, you may initialize every element of the
                array to a specific value by replacing the question mark (?) with some particular value. For
                example, to initialize the above array so that each element contains one you’d use the
                code:
                A                         integer   3 dup (4 dup (5 dup (1)))
                    If you want to initialize each element of the array to a different value, you’ll have to
                enter each value individually. If the size of a row is small enough, the best way to
                approach this task is to place the data for each row of an array on its own line. Consider
                the following 4x4 array declaration:
                A                         integer   0,1,2,3
                                          integer     1,0,1,1
                                          integer     5,7,2,2
                                          integer     0,0,7,6



Page 216
                                                                                       Variables and Data Structures

                Once again, the assembler doesn’t care where you split the lines, but the above is much
                easier to identify as a 4x4 array than the following that emits the exact same data:
                A                     integer     0,1,2,3,1,0,1,1,5,7,2,2,0,0,7,6
                   Of course, if you have a large array, an array with really large rows, or an array with
                many dimensions, there is little hope for winding up with something reasonable. That’s
                when comments that carefully explain everything come in handy.



5.6.2.4     Accessing Multidimensional Array Elements in Assembly Language
                    Well, you’ve seen the formulae for computing the address of an array element. You’ve
                even looked at some Pascal code you could use to access elements of a multidimensional
                array. Now it’s time to see how to access elements of those arrays using assembly lan-
                guage.
                    The mov, add, and mul instructions make short work of the various equations that com-
                pute offsets into multidimensional arrays. Let’s consider a two dimension array first:
                ; Note: TwoD’s row size is 16 bytes.
                TwoD                  integer     4 dup (8 dup (?))
                i                     integer     ?
                j                     integer     ?
                                        .         .
                                        .         .
                                        .         .
                ; To peform the operation TwoD[i,j] := 5; you’d use the code:
                                      mov         ax, 8        ;8 elements per row
                                      mul         i
                                      add         ax, j
                                      add         ax, ax       ;Multiply by element size (2)
                                      mov         bx, ax       ;Put in a register we can use
                                      mov         TwoD [bx], 5
                Of course, if you have an 80386 chip (or better), you could use the following code10:
                                      mov         eax, 8       ;Zeros H.O. 16 bits of EAX.
                                      mul         i
                                      add         ax, j
                                      mov         TwoD[eax*2], 5
                    Note that this code does not require the use of a two register addressing mode on the
                80x86. Although an addressing mode like TwoD [bx][si] looks like it should be a natural for
                accessing two dimensional arrays, that isn’t the purpose of this addressing mode.
                     Now consider a second example that uses a three dimension array:
                ThreeD                integer     4 dup (4 dup (4 dup (?)))
                i                     integer     ?
                j                     integer     ?
                k                     integer     ?
                                        .         .
                                        .         .
                                        .         .
                ; To peform the operation ThreeD[i,j,k] := 1; you’d use the code:
                                      mov         bx, 4            ;4 elements per column
                                      mov         ax, i
                                      mul         bx
                                      add         ax, j

   10. Actually, there is an even better 80386 instruction sequence than this, but it uses instructions yet to be dis-
   cussed.


                                                                                                            Page 217
Chapter 05

                                       mul         bx              ;4 elements per row
                                       add         ax, k
                                       add         ax, ax          ;Multiply by element size (2)
                                       mov         bx, ax          ;Put in a register we can use
                                       mov         ThreeD [bx],    1
                     Of course, if you have an 80386 or better processor, this can be improved somewhat by
                 using the following code:
                                       mov         ebx, 4
                                       mov         eax, ebx
                                       mul         i
                                       add         ax, j
                                       mul         bx
                                       add         k
                                       mov         ThreeD[eax*2], 1



5.6.3        Structures
                      The second major composite data structure is the Pascal record or C structure11. The
                 Pascal terminology is probably better, since it tends to avoid confusion with the more gen-
                 eral term data structure. However, MASM uses “structure” so it doesn’t make sense to
                 deviate from this. Furthermore, MASM uses the term record to denote something slightly
                 different, furthering the reason to stick with the term structure.
                     Whereas an array is homogeneous, whose elements are all the same, the elements in a
                 structure can be of any type. Arrays let you select a particular element via an integer
                 index. With structures, you must select an element (known as a field) by name.
                     The whole purpose of a structure is to let you encapsulate different, but logically
                 related, data into a single package. The Pascal record declaration for a student is probably
                 the most typical example:
                 student = record
                                       Name: string [64];
                                       Major: integer;
                                       SSN:   string[11];
                                       Midterm1: integer;
                                       Midterm2: integer;
                                       Final: integer;
                                       Homework: integer;
                                       Projects: integer;
                              end;
                     Most Pascal compilers allocate each field in a record to contiguous memory locations.
                 This means that Pascal will reserve the first 65 bytes for the name12, the next two bytes
                 hold the major code, the next 12 the Social Security Number, etc.
                     In assembly language, you can also create structure types using the MASM struct
                 statement. You would encode the above record in assembly language as follows:
                 student               struct
                 Name                  char        65 dup (?)
                 Major                 integer     ?
                 SSN                   char        12 dup (?)
                 Midterm1              integer     ?
                 Midterm2              integer     ?
                 Final                 integer     ?
                 Homework              integer     ?
                 Projects              integer     ?
                 student               ends


    11. It also goes by some other names in other languages, but most people recognize at least one of these names.
    12. Strings require an extra byte, in addition to all the characters in the string, to encode the length.


Page 218
                                                                                            Variables and Data Structures



                                 Name                         SSN               Mid 2 Homework
                               (65 bytes)                   (12 bytes)        (2 bytes) (2 bytes)

                  John
                                              Major                        Mid 1     Final   Projects
                                            (2 bytes)                    (2 bytes) (2 bytes) (2 bytes)

Figure 5.7 Student Data Structure Storage in Memory

               Note that the structure ends with the ends (for end structure) statement. The label on the
               ends statement must be the same as on the struct statement.
                   The field names within the structure must be unique. That is, the same name may not
               appear two or more times in the same structure. However, all field names are local to that
               structure. Therefore, you may reuse those field names elsewhere in the program13.
                   The struct directive only defines a structure type. It does not reserve storage for a struc-
               ture variable. To actually reserve storage you need to declare a variable using the structure
               name as a MASM statement, e.g.,
               John                   student          {}
               The braces must appear in the operand field. Any initial values must appear between the
               braces. The above declaration allocates memory as shown in Figure 5.7. :
               If the label John corresponds to the base address of this structure, then the Name field is at
               offset John+0, the Major field is at offset John+65, the SSN field is at offset John+67, etc.
                    To access an element of a structure you need to know the offset from the beginning of
               the structure to the desired field. For example, the Major field in the variable John is at off-
               set 65 from the base address of John. Therefore, you could store the value in ax into this
               field using the instruction mov John[65], ax. Unfortunately, memorizing all the offsets to
               fields in a structure defeats the whole purpose of using them in the first place. After all, if
               you’ve got to deal with these numeric offsets why not just use an array of bytes instead of
               a structure?
                   Well, as it turns out, MASM lets you refer to field names in a structure using the same
               mechanism C and Pascal use: the dot operator. To store ax into the Major field, you could
               use mov John.Major,ax instead of the previous instruction. This is much more readable and
               certainly easier to use.
                   Note that the use of the dot operator does not introduce a new addressing mode. The
               instruction mov John.Major,ax still uses the displacement only addressing mode. MASM
               simply adds the base address of John with the offset to the Major field (65) to get the actual
               displacement to encode into the instruction.
                   You may also specify default initial values when creating a structure. In the previous
               example, the fields of the student structure were given indeterminate values by specifying
               “?” in the operand field of each field’s declaration. As it turns out, there are two different
               ways to specify an initial value for structure fields. Consider the following definition of a
               “point” data structure:
               Point                  struct
               x                      word        0
               y                      word        0
               z                      word        0
               Point                  ends
               Whenever you declare a variable of type point using a statement similar to
               CurPoint               Point       {}


  13. You cannot redefine a fieldname as an equate or macro label. You may, however, reuse a field name as a state-
  ment label. Also, note that versions of MASM prior to 6.0 do not support the ability to reuse structure field names.


                                                                                                                Page 219
Chapter 05

                  MASM automatically initializes the CurPoint.x, CurPoint.y, and CurPoint.z variables to zero.
                  This works out great in those cases where your objects usually start off with the same ini-
                  tial values14. Of course, it might turn out that you would like to initialize the X, Y, and Z
                  fields of the points you declare, but you want to give each point a different value. That is
                  easily accomplished by specifying initial values inside the braces:
                  Point1                 point        {0,1,2}
                  Point2                 point        {1,1,1}
                  Point3                 point        {0,1,1}
                  MASM fills in the values for the fields in the order that they appear in the operand field.
                  For Point1 above, MASM initializes the X field with zero, the Y field with one, and the Z
                  field with two.
                      The type of the initial value in the operand field must match the type of the corre-
                  sponding field in the structure definition. You cannot, for example, specify an integer con-
                  stant for a real4 field, nor could you specify a value greater than 255 for a byte field.
                      MASM does not require that you initialize all fields in a structure. If you leave a field
                  blank, MASM will use the specified default value (undefined if you specify “?” rather
                  than a default value).



5.6.4        Arrays of Structures and Arrays/Structures as Structure Fields
                      Structs may contain other structures or arrays as fields. Consider the following defini-
                  tion:
                  Pixel                  struct
                  Pt                     point        {}
                  Color                  dword        ?
                  Pixel                  ends
                  The definition above defines a single point with a 32 bit color component. When initializ-
                  ing an object of type Pixel, the first initializer corresponds to the Pt field, not the x-coordi-
                  nate field. The following definition is incorrect:
                  ThisPt                 Pixel        {5,10}
                  The value of the first field (“5”) is not an object of type point. Therefore, the assembler gen-
                  erates an error when encountering this statement. MASM will allow you to initialize the
                  fields of ThisPt using declarations like the following:
                  ThisPt                 Pixel        {,10}
                  ThisPt                 Pixel        {{},10}
                  ThisPt                 Pixel        {{1,2,3}, 10}
                  ThisPt                 Pixel        {{1,,1}, 12}
                  The first and second examples above use the default values for the Pt field (x=0, y=0, z=0)
                  and set the Color field to 10. Note the use of braces to surround the initial values for the
                  point type in the second, third, and fourth examples. The third example above initializes
                  the x, y, and z fields of the Pt field to one, two, and three, respectively. The last example
                  initializes the x and z fields to one and lets the y field take on the initial value specified by
                  the Point structure (zero).
                       Accessing Pixel fields is very easy. Like a high level language you use a single period
                  to reference the Pt field and a second period to access the x, y, and z fields of point:




    14. Note, of course, that the initial values for the x, y , and z fields need not all be zero. You could have initialized
    the fields to 1, 2, and 3 just as easily.


Page 220
                                                                                   Variables and Data Structures

                                        mov          ax, ThisPt.Pt.X
                                         .
                                         .
                                         .
                                        mov          ThisPt.Pt.Y, 0
                                         .
                                         .
                                         .
                                        mov          ThisPt.Pt.Z, di
                                         .
                                         .
                                         .
                                        mov          ThisPt.Color, EAX
                     You can also declare arrays as structure fields. The following structure creates a data
                 type capable of representing an object with eight points (e.g., a cube):
                 Object8                struct
                 Pts                    point        8 dup (?)
                 Color                  dword        0
                 Object8                ends
                 This structure allocates storage for eight different points. Accessing an element of the Pts
                 array requires that you know the size of an object of type point (remember, you must mul-
                 tiply the index into the array by the size of one element, six in this particular case). Sup-
                 pose, for example, that you have a variable CUBE of type Object8. You could access
                 elements of the Pts array as follows:
                 ; CUBE.Pts[i].X := 0;
                                        mov          ax, 6
                                        mul          i            ;6 bytes per element.
                                        mov          si, ax
                                        mov          CUBE.Pts[si].X, 0
                      The one unfortunate aspect of all this is that you must know the size of each element
                 of the Pts array. Fortunately, MASM provides an operator that will compute the size of an
                 array element (in bytes) for you, more on that later.



5.6.5      Pointers to Structures
                      During execution, your program may refer to structure objects directly or indirectly
                 using a pointer. When you use a pointer to access fields of a structure, you must load one
                 of the 80x86’s pointer registers (si, di, bx, or bp on processors less than the 80386) with the
                 offset and es, ds, ss, or cs15 with the segment of the desired structure. Suppose you have
                 the following variable declarations (assuming the Object8 structure from the previous sec-
                 tion):
                 Cube                   Object8      {}
                 CubePtr                dword        Cube
                 CubePtr contains the address of (i.e., it is a pointer to) the Cube object. To access the Color
                 field of the Cube object, you could use an instruction like mov eax,Cube.Color. When access-
                 ing a field via a pointer you need to load the address of the object into a segment:pointer
                 register pair, such as es:bx. The instruction les bx,CubePtr will do the trick. After doing so,
                 you can access fields of the Cube object using the disp+bx addressing mode. The only
                 problem is “How do you specify which field to access?” Consider briefly, the following
                 incorrect code:
                                        les          bx, CubePtr
                                        mov          eax, es:[bx].Color



   15. Add FS or GS to this list for the 80386 and later.


                                                                                                       Page 221
Chapter 05

                   There is one major problem with the code above. Since field names are local to a structure
                   and it’s possible to reuse a field name in two or more structures, how does MASM deter-
                   mine which offset Color represents? When accessing structure members directly (.e.g.,
                   mov eax,Cube.Color) there is no ambiguity since Cube has a specific type that the assembler
                   can check. es:bx, on the other hand, can point at anything. In particular, it can point at any
                   structure that contains a Color field. So the assembler cannot, on its own, decide which off-
                   set to use for the Color symbol.
                       MASM resolves this ambiguity by requiring that you explicitly supply a type in this
                   case. Probably the easiest way to do this is to specify the structure name as a pseudo-field:
                                         les         bx, CubePtr
                                         mov         eax, es:[bx].Object8.Color
                   By specifying the structure name, MASM knows which offset value to use for the Color
                   symbol16.



5.7       Sample Programs
                        The following short sample programs demonstrate many of the concepts appearing in
                   this chapter.



5.7.1         Simple Variable Declarations
                   ;   Sample variable declarations
                   ;   This sample file demonstrates how to declare and access some simple
                   ;   variables in an assembly language program.
                   ;
                   ;   Randall Hyde
                   ;
                   ;
                   ;   Note: global variable declarations should go in the "dseg" segment:

                   dseg                  segment     para public 'data'

                   ; Some simple variable declarations:

                   character             byte        ?                ;"?" means uninitialized.
                   UnsignedIntVar        word        ?
                   DblUnsignedVar        dword       ?

                   ;You can use the typedef statement to declare more meaningful type names:

                   integer               typedef     sword
                   char                  typedef     byte
                   FarPtr                typedef     dword

                   ; Sample variable declarations using the above types:

                   J                     integer     ?
                   c1                    char        ?
                   PtrVar                FarPtr      ?


                   ; You can tell MASM & DOS to initialize a variable when DOS loads the
                   ; program into memory by specifying the initial value in the operand


      16. Users of MASM 5.1 and other assemblers should keep in mind that field names are not local to the structure.
      Instead, they must all be unique within a source file. As a result, such programs do not require the structure name
      in the “dot path” for a particular field. Keep this in mind when converting older code to MASM 6.x.


Page 222
                                                         Variables and Data Structures

; field of the variable's declaration:

K                  integer   4
c2                 char      'A'
PtrVar2            FarPtr    L           ;Initializes PtrVar2 with the
                                         ; address of L.


;   You can also set aside more than one byte, word, or double word of
;   storage using these directives. If you place several values in the
;   operand field, separated by commas, the assembler will emit one byte,
;   word, or dword for each operand:

L                  integer   0, 1, 2, 3
c3                 char      'A', 0dh, 0ah, 0
PtrTbl             FarPtr    J, K, L

;   The BYTE directive lets you specify a string of characters byte enclosing
;   the string in quotes or apostrophes. The directive emits one byte of data
;   for every character in the string (not including the quotes or apostrophes
;   that delimit the string):

string             byte      "Hello world",0dh,0ah,0


dseg               ends




; The following program demonstrates how to access each of the above
; variables.

cseg               segment   para public 'code'
                   assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

Main               proc
                   mov       ax, dseg;These statements are provided by
                   mov       ds, ax       ; shell.asm to initialize the
                   mov       es, ax       ; segment register.


; Some simple instructions that demonstrate how to access memory:

                   lea       bx, L        ;Point bx at first word in L.
                   mov       ax, [bx];Fetch word at L.
                   add       ax, 2[bx];Add in word at L+2 (the "1").
                   add       ax, 4[bx];Add in word at L+4 (the "2").
                   add       ax, 6[bx];Add in word at L+6 (the "3").
                   mul       K            ;Compute (0+1+2+3)*123.
                   mov       J, ax        ;Save away result in J.

                   les       bx, PtrVar2;Loads es:di with address of L.
                   mov       di, K        ;Loads 4 into di
                   mov       ax, es:[bx][di];Fetch value of L+4.


; Examples of some byte accesses:

                   mov       c1, ' '     ;Put a space into the c1 var.
                   mov       al, c2      ;c3 := c2
                   mov       c3, al



                                                                             Page 223
Chapter 05

                Quit:              mov       ah, 4ch      ;Magic number for DOS
                                   int       21h          ; to tell this program to quit.
                Main               endp

                cseg               ends

                sseg               segment   para stack 'stack'
                stk                byte      1024 dup ("stack   ")
                sseg               ends

                zzzzzzseg          segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
                LastBytes          byte      16 dup (?)
                zzzzzzseg          ends
                                   end       Main




5.7.2        Using Pointer Variables
                ;   Using Pointer Variables in an Assembly Language Program
                ;
                ;   This short sample program demonstrates the use of pointers in
                ;   an assembly language program.
                ;
                ;   Randall Hyde

                dseg               segment   para public 'data'


                ; Some variables we will access indirectly (using pointers):

                J                  word      0, 0, 0, 0
                K                  word      1, 2, 3, 4
                L                  word      5, 6, 7, 8

                ;   Near pointers are 16-bits wide and hold an offset into the current data
                ;   segment (dseg in this program). Far pointers are 32-bits wide and hold
                ;   a complete segment:offset address. The following type definitions let
                ;   us easily create near and far pointers

                nWrdPtr            typedef   near ptr word
                fWrdPtr            typedef   far ptr word


                ; Now for the actual pointer variables:

                Ptr1               nWrdPtr   ?
                Ptr2               nWrdPtr   K            ;Initialize with K's address.
                Ptr3               fWrdPtr   L            ;Initialize with L's segmented adrs.

                dseg               ends



                cseg               segment   para public 'code'
                                   assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

                Main               proc
                                   mov       ax, dseg     ;These statements are provided by
                                   mov       ds, ax       ; shell.asm to initialize the
                                   mov       es, ax       ; segment register.




Page 224
                                                         Variables and Data Structures

; Initialize Ptr1 (a near pointer) with the address of the J variable.

                 lea       ax, J
                 mov       Ptr1, ax

; Add the four words in variables J, K, and L together using pointers to
; these variables:

                 mov       bx, Ptr1      ;Get near ptr to J's 1st word.
                 mov       si, Ptr2      ;Get near ptr to K's 1st word.
                 les       di, Ptr3      ;Get far ptr to L's 1st word.



                 mov       ax, ds:[si]   ;Get data at K+0.
                 add       ax, es:[di]   ;Add in data at L+0.
                 mov       ds:[bx], ax   ;Store result to J+0.

                 add       bx, 2         ;Move to J+2.
                 add       si, 2         ;Move to K+2.
                 add       di, 2         ;Move to L+2.



                 mov       ax, ds:[si]   ;Get data at K+2.
                 add       ax, es:[di]   ;Add in data at L+2.
                 mov       ds:[bx], ax   ;Store result to J+2.

                 add       bx, 2         ;Move to J+4.
                 add       si, 2         ;Move to K+4.
                 add       di, 2         ;Move to L+4.



                 mov       ax, ds:[si]   ;Get data at K+4.
                 add       ax, es:[di]   ;Add in data at L+4.
                 mov       ds:[bx], ax   ;Store result to J+4.

                 add       bx, 2         ;Move to J+6.
                 add       si, 2         ;Move to K+6.
                 add       di, 2         ;Move to L+6.



                 mov       ax, ds:[si]   ;Get data at K+6.
                 add       ax, es:[di]   ;Add in data at L+6.
                 mov       ds:[bx], ax   ;Store result to J+6.



Quit:            mov       ah, 4ch       ;Magic number for DOS
                 int       21h           ; to tell this program to quit.
Main             endp

cseg             ends

sseg             segment   para stack 'stack'
stk              byte      1024 dup ("stack   ")
sseg             ends

zzzzzzseg        segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
LastBytes        byte      16 dup (?)
zzzzzzseg        ends
                 end       Main

                                                                             Page 225
Chapter 05


5.7.3        Single Dimension Array Access
                ;   Sample variable declarations
                ;   This sample file demonstrates how to declare and access some single
                ;   dimension array variables in an assembly language program.
                ;
                ;   Randall Hyde


                                   .386                                ;Need to use some 80386
                                   option    segment:use16             ; addressing modes.

                dseg               segment   para public 'data'

                J                  word      ?
                K                  word      ?
                L                  word      ?
                M                  word      ?

                JD                 dword     0
                KD                 dword     1
                LD                 dword     2
                MD                 dword     3

                ; Some simple uninitialized array declarations:

                ByteAry            byte      4   dup   (?)
                WordAry            word      4   dup   (?)
                DwordAry           dword     4   dup   (?)
                RealAry            real8     4   dup   (?)


                ; Some arrays with initialized values:

                BArray             byte      0, 1, 2, 3
                WArray             word      0, 1, 2, 3
                DWArray            dword     0, 1, 2, 3
                RArray             real8     0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0


                ; An array of pointers:

                PtrArray           dword     ByteAry, WordAry, DwordAry, RealAry

                dseg               ends

                ; The following program demonstrates how to access each of the above
                ; variables.

                cseg               segment   para public 'code'
                                   assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

                Main               proc
                                   mov       ax, dseg        ;These statements are provided by
                                   mov       ds, ax          ; shell.asm to initialize the
                                   mov       es, ax          ; segment register.


                ;   Initialize the index variables. Note that these variables provide
                ;   logical indices into the arrays. Don't forget that we've got to
                ;   multiply these values by the element size when accessing elements of
                ;   an array.


Page 226
                                                                    Variables and Data Structures


                            mov       J,   0
                            mov       K,   1
                            mov       L,   2
                            mov       M,   3

           ; The following code shows how to access elements of the arrays using
           ; simple 80x86 addressing modes:

                            mov       bx, J        ;AL := ByteAry[J]
                            mov       al, ByteAry[bx]

                            mov       bx, K        ;AX := WordAry[K]
                            add       bx, bx       ;Index*2 since this is a word array.
                            mov       ax, WordAry[bx]

                            mov       bx, L        ;EAX := DwordAry[L]
                            add       bx, bx       ;Index*4 since this is a double
                            add       bx, bx       ; word array.
                            mov       eax, DwordAry[bx]

                            mov       bx,   M        ;BX := address(RealAry[M])
                            add       bx,   bx       ;Index*8 since this is a quad
                            add       bx,   bx       ; word array.
                            add       bx,   bx
                            lea       bx,   RealAry[bx];Base address + index*8.

           ; If you have an 80386 or later CPU, you can use the 386's scaled indexed
           ; addressing modes to simplify array access.

                            mov       ebx, JD
                            mov       al, ByteAry[ebx]

                            mov       ebx, KD
                            mov       ax, WordAry[ebx*2]

                            mov       ebx, LD
                            mov       eax, DwordAry[ebx*4]

                            mov       ebx, MD
                            lea       bx, RealAry[ebx*8]

           Quit:            mov       ah, 4ch       ;Magic number for DOS
                            int       21h           ; to tell this program to quit.
           Main             endp

           cseg             ends

           sseg             segment   para stack 'stack'
           stk              byte      1024 dup ("stack   ")
           sseg             ends

           zzzzzzseg        segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
           LastBytes        byte      16 dup (?)
           zzzzzzseg        ends
                            end       Main




5.7.4   Multidimensional Array Access
           ; Multidimensional Array declaration and access
           ;


                                                                                        Page 227
Chapter 05

             ; Randall Hyde


                              .386                                  ;Need these two statements to
                              option    segment:use16               ; use the 80386 register set.


             dseg             segment   para public 'data'


             ; Indices we will use for the arrays.

             J                word      1
             K                word      2
             L                word      3

             ; Some two-dimensional arrays.
             ; Note how this code uses the "dup" operator to suggest the size
             ; of each dimension.

             B2Ary            byte      3 dup (4 dup (?))
             W2Ary            word      4 dup (3 dup (?))
             D2Ary            dword     2 dup (6 dup (?))



             ; 2D arrays with initialization.
             ; Note the use of data layout to suggest the sizes of each array.

             B2Ary2           byte      0, 1, 2, 3
                              byte      4, 5, 6, 7
                              byte      8, 9, 10, 11

             W2Ary2           word      0, 1, 2
                              word      3, 4, 5
                              word      6, 7, 8
                              word      9, 10, 11

             D2Ary2           dword     0,    1,   2,   3, 4, 5
                              dword     6,    7,   8,   9, 10, 11

             ; A sample three dimensional array.

             W3Ary            word      2 dup (3 dup (4 dup (?)))

             dseg             ends


             cseg             segment   para public 'code'
                              assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

             Main             proc
                              mov       ax, dseg        ;These statements are provided by
                              mov       ds, ax          ; shell.asm to initialize the
                              mov       es, ax          ; segment register.

             ; AL := B2Ary2[j,k]

                              mov       bx,   J        ;index := (j*4+k)
                              add       bx,   bx       ;j*2
                              add       bx,   bx       ;j*4
                              add       bx,   K        ;j*4+k
                              mov       al,   B2Ary2[bx]



Page 228
                                                                    Variables and Data Structures


           ; AX := W2Ary2[j,k]

                            mov       ax,   J       ;index := (j*3 + k)*2
                            mov       bx,   3
                            mul       bx             ;(j*3)-- This destroys DX!
                            add       ax,   k        ;(j*3+k)
                            add       ax,   ax       ;(j*3+k)*2
                            mov       bx,   ax
                            mov       ax,   W2Ary2[bx]


           ; EAX := D2Ary[i,j]

                            mov       ax, J        ;index := (j*6 + k)*4
                            mov       bx, 6
                            mul       bx           ;DX:AX := j*6, ignore overflow in DX.
                            add       ax, k        ;j*6 + k
                            add       ax, ax       ;(j*6 + k)*2
                            add       ax, ax       ;(j*6 + k)*4
                            mov       bx, ax
                            mov       eax, D2Ary[bx]


           ; Sample access of a three dimensional array.
           ;
           ; AX := W3Ary[J,K,L]

                            mov       ax,   J       ;index := ((j*3 + k)*4 + l)*2
                            mov       bx,   3
                            mul       bx             ;j*3
                            add       ax,   K        ;j*3 + k
                            add       ax,   ax       ;(j*3 + k)*2
                            add       ax,   ax       ;(j*3 + k)*4
                            add       ax,   l        ;(j*3 + k)*4 + l
                            add       ax,   ax       ;((j*3 + k)*4 + l)*2
                            mov       bx,   ax
                            mov       ax,   W3Ary[bx]


           Quit:            mov       ah, 4ch       ;Magic number for DOS
                            int       21h           ; to tell this program to quit.
           Main             endp

           cseg             ends

           sseg             segment   para stack 'stack'
           stk              byte      1024 dup ("stack   ")
           sseg             ends

           zzzzzzseg        segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
           LastBytes        byte      16 dup (?)
           zzzzzzseg        ends
                            end       Main




5.7.5   Simple Structure Access
           ; Sample Structure Definitions and Accesses.
           ;
           ; Randall Hyde



                                                                                        Page 229
Chapter 05


             dseg             segment   para public 'data'


             ; The following structure holds the bit values for an 80x86 mod-reg-r/m byte.

             mode             struct
             modbits          byte      ?
             reg              byte      ?
             rm               byte      ?
             mode             ends


             Instr1Adrs       mode      {};All fields uninitialized.
             Instr2Adrs       mode      {}


             ; Some structures with initialized fields.

             axbx             mode      {11b, 000b, 000b}        ;"ax, ax" adrs mode.
             axdisp           mode      {00b, 000b, 110b}        ;"ax, disp" adrs mode.
             cxdispbxsi       mode      {01b, 001b, 000b}        ;"cx, disp8[bx][si]" mode.


             ; Near pointers to some structures:

             sPtr1            word      axdisp
             sPtr2            word      Instr2Adrs

             dseg             ends


             cseg             segment   para public 'code'
                              assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

             Main             proc
                              mov       ax, dseg     ;These statements are provided by
                              mov       ds, ax       ; shell.asm to initialize the
                              mov       es, ax       ; segment register.


             ; To access fields of a structure variable directly, just use the "."
             ; operator like you would in Pascal or C:

                              mov       al, axbx.modbits
                              mov       Instr1Adrs.modbits, al

                              mov       al, axbx.reg
                              mov       Instr1Adrs.reg, al

                              mov       al, axbx.rm
                              mov       Instr1Adrs.rm, al


             ; When accessing elements of a structure indirectly (that is, using a
             ; pointer) you must specify the structure type name as the first
             ; "field" so MASM doesn't get confused:

                              mov       si, sPtr1
                              mov       di, sPtr2

                              mov       al, ds:[si].mode.modbits
                              mov       ds:[di].mode.modbits, al



Page 230
                                                                    Variables and Data Structures

                            mov        al, ds:[si].mode.reg
                            mov        ds:[di].mode.reg, al

                            mov        al, ds:[si].mode.rm
                            mov        ds:[di].mode.rm, al


           Quit:            mov        ah, 4ch       ;Magic number for DOS
                            int        21h           ; to tell this program to quit.
           Main             endp

           cseg             ends

           sseg             segment    para stack 'stack'
           stk              byte       1024 dup ("stack   ")
           sseg             ends

           zzzzzzseg        segment    para public 'zzzzzz'
           LastBytes        byte       16 dup (?)
           zzzzzzseg        ends
                            end        Main




5.7.6   Arrays of Structures
           ; Arrays of Structures
           ;
           ; Randall Hyde


           dseg             segment    para public 'data'


           ; A structure that defines an (x,y) coordinate.
           ; Note that the Point data type requires four bytes.

           Point            struct
           X                word       ?
           Y                word       ?
           Point            ends



           ; An uninitialized point:

           Pt1              Point      {}

           ; An initialized point:

           Pt2              Point      {12,45}


           ; A one-dimensional array of uninitialized points:

           PtAry1           Point      16 dup ({})   ;Note the "{}" inside the parens.


           ; A one-dimensional array of points, all initialized to the origin.

           PtAry1i          Point      16 dup ({0,0})




                                                                                        Page 231
Chapter 05

             ; A two-dimensional array of points:

             PtAry2           Point     4 dup (4 dup ({}))


             ; A three-dimensional array of points, all initialized to the origin.

             PtAry3           Point     2 dup (3 dup (4 dup ({0,0})))



             ; A one-dimensional array of points, all initialized to different values:

             iPtAry           Point     {0,0}, {1,2}, {3,4}, {5,6}


             ; Some indices for the arrays:

             J                word      1
             K                word      2
             L                word      3

             dseg             ends




             ; The following program demonstrates how to access each of the above
             ; variables.

             cseg             segment   para public 'code'
                              assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

             Main             proc
                              mov       ax, dseg     ;These statements are provided by
                              mov       ds, ax       ; shell.asm to initialize the
                              mov       es, ax       ; segment register.

             ; PtAry1[J] := iPtAry[J]

                              mov       bx, J        ;Index := J*4 since there are four
                              add       bx, bx       ; bytes per array element (each
                              add       bx, bx       ; element contains two words).

                              mov       ax, iPtAry[bx].X
                              mov       PtAry1[bx].X, ax

                              mov       ax, iPtAry[bx].Y
                              mov       PtAry1[bx].Y, ax

             ; CX := PtAry2[K,L].X;   DX := PtAry2[K,L].Y

                              mov       bx,   K      ;Index := (K*4 + J)*4
                              add       bx,   bx     ;K*2
                              add       bx,   bx     ;K*4
                              add       bx,   J      ;K*4 + J
                              add       bx,   bx     ;(K*4 + J)*2
                              add       bx,   bx     ;(K*4 + J)*4

                              mov       cx, PtAry2[bx].X
                              mov       dx, PtAry2[bx].Y

             ; PtAry3[j,k,l].X := 0

Page 232
                                                                    Variables and Data Structures


                              mov       ax, j        ;Index := ((j*3 +k)*4 + l)*4
                              mov       bx, 3
                              mul       bx           ;j*3
                              add       ax, k        ;j*3 + k
                              add       ax, ax       ;(j*3 + k)*2
                              add       ax, ax       ;(j*3 + k)*4
                              add       ax, l        ;(j*3 + k)*4 + l
                              add       ax, ax       ;((j*3 + k)*4 + l)*2
                              add       ax, ax       ;((j*3 + k)*4 + l)*4
                              mov       bx, ax
                              mov       PtAry3[bx].X, 0

           Quit:              mov       ah, 4ch      ;Magic number for DOS
                              int       21h          ; to tell this program to quit.
           Main               endp
           cseg               ends

           sseg               segment   para stack 'stack'
           stk                byte      1024 dup ("stack   ")
           sseg               ends

           zzzzzzseg          segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
           LastBytes          byte      16 dup (?)
           zzzzzzseg          ends
                              end       Main




5.7.7   Structures and Arrays as Fields of Another Structure
           ; Structures Containing Structures as fields
           ; Structures Containing Arrays as fields
           ;
           ; Randall Hyde


           dseg               segment   para public 'data'

           Point              struct
           X                  word      ?
           Y                  word      ?
           Point              ends

           ; We can define a rectangle with only two points.
           ; The color field contains an eight-bit color value.
           ; Note: the size of a Rect is 9 bytes.

           Rect               struct
           UpperLeft          Point     {}
           LowerRight         Point     {}
           Color              byte      ?
           Rect               ends

           ;   Pentagons have five points, so use an array of points to
           ;   define the pentagon. Of course, we also need the color
           ;   field.
           ;   Note: the size of a pentagon is 21 bytes.

           Pent               struct
           Color              byte      ?
           Pts                Point     5 dup ({})
           Pent               ends


                                                                                        Page 233
Chapter 05



             ; Okay, here are some variable declarations:

             Rect1            Rect      {}
             Rect2            Rect      {{0,0}, {1,1}, 1}

             Pentagon1        Pent      {}
             Pentagons        Pent      {}, {}, {}, {}

             Index            word      2

             dseg             ends


             cseg             segment   para public 'code'
                              assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

             Main             proc
                              mov       ax, dseg    ;These statements are provided by
                              mov       ds, ax      ; shell.asm to initialize the
                              mov       es, ax      ; segment register.

             ; Rect1.UpperLeft.X := Rect2.UpperLeft.X

                              mov       ax, Rect2.Upperleft.X
                              mov       Rect1.Upperleft.X, ax

             ; Pentagon1 := Pentagons[Index]

                              mov       ax, Index;Need Index*21
                              mov       bx, 21
                              mul       bx
                              mov       bx, ax

             ; Copy the first point:

                              mov       ax, Pentagons[bx].Pts[0].X
                              mov       Pentagon1.Pts[0].X, ax

                              mov       ax, Pentagons[bx].Pts[0].Y
                              mov       Pentagon1.Pts[0].Y, ax

             ; Copy the second point:

                              mov       ax, Pentagons[bx].Pts[2].X
                              mov       Pentagon1.Pts[4].X, ax

                              mov       ax, Pentagons[bx].Pts[2].Y
                              mov       Pentagon1.Pts[4].Y, ax

             ; Copy the third point:

                              mov       ax, Pentagons[bx].Pts[4].X
                              mov       Pentagon1.Pts[8].X, ax

                              mov       ax, Pentagons[bx].Pts[4].Y
                              mov       Pentagon1.Pts[8].Y, ax

             ; Copy the fourth point:

                              mov       ax, Pentagons[bx].Pts[6].X
                              mov       Pentagon1.Pts[12].X, ax



Page 234
                                                                       Variables and Data Structures

                               mov       ax, Pentagons[bx].Pts[6].Y
                               mov       Pentagon1.Pts[12].Y, ax

           ; Copy the fifth point:

                               mov       ax, Pentagons[bx].Pts[8].X
                               mov       Pentagon1.Pts[16].X, ax

                               mov       ax, Pentagons[bx].Pts[8].Y
                               mov       Pentagon1.Pts[16].Y, ax

           ; Copy the Color:

                               mov       al, Pentagons[bx].Color
                               mov       Pentagon1.Color, al


           Quit:               mov       ah, 4ch       ;Magic number for DOS
                               int       21h           ; to tell this program to quit.
           Main                endp
           cseg                ends

           sseg                segment   para stack 'stack'
           stk                 byte      1024 dup ("stack   ")
           sseg                ends

           zzzzzzseg           segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
           LastBytes           byte      16 dup (?)
           zzzzzzseg           ends
                               end       Main




5.7.8   Pointers to Structures and Arrays of Structures
           ; Pointers to structures
           ; Pointers to arrays of structures
           ;
           ; Randall Hyde


                               .386                                ;Need these two statements so
                               option    segment:use16             ; we can use 80386 registers

           dseg                segment   para public 'data'

           ; Sample structure.
           ; Note: size is seven bytes.

           Sample              struct
           b                   byte      ?
           w                   word      ?
           d                   dword     ?
           Sample              ends


           ; Some variable declarations:

           OneSample           Sample    {}
           SampleAry           Sample    16 dup ({})

           ; Pointers to the above



                                                                                           Page 235
Chapter 05

             OnePtr           word      OneSample      ;A near pointer.
             AryPtr           dword     SampleAry


             ; Index into the array:

             Index            word      8

             dseg             ends




             ; The following program demonstrates how to access each of the above
             ; variables.

             cseg             segment   para public 'code'
                              assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

             Main             proc
                              mov       ax, dseg       ;These statements are provided by
                              mov       ds, ax         ; shell.asm to initialize the
                              mov       es, ax         ; segment register.

             ; AryPtr^[Index] := OnePtr^


                              mov       si,   OnePtr   ;Get pointer to OneSample
                              les       bx,   AryPtr   ;Get pointer to array of samples
                              mov       ax,   Index    ;Need index*7
                              mov       di,   7
                              mul       di
                              mov       di,   ax

                              mov       al, ds:[si].Sample.b
                              mov       es:[bx][di].Sample.b, al

                              mov       ax, ds:[si].Sample.w
                              mov       es:[bx][di].Sample.w, ax

                              mov       eax, ds:[si].Sample.d
                              mov       es:[bx][di].Sample.d, eax


             Quit:            mov       ah, 4ch        ;Magic number for DOS
                              int       21h            ; to tell this program to quit.
             Main             endp

             cseg             ends

             sseg             segment   para stack 'stack'
             stk              byte      1024 dup ("stack   ")
             sseg             ends

             zzzzzzseg        segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
             LastBytes        byte      16 dup (?)
             zzzzzzseg        ends
                              end       Main




Page 236
                                                                            Variables and Data Structures


5.8   Laboratory Exercises
               In these laboratory exercises you will learn how to step through a program using
           CodeView and observe the results. Knowing how to trace through a program is an impor-
           tant skill to posses. There is no better way to learn assembly language than to single step
           through a program and observe the actions of each instruction. Even if you already know
           assembly language, tracing through a program with a debugger like CodeView is one of
           the best ways to verify that your program is working properly.
               In these lab exercises you will assemble the sample program provided in the previous
           section. Then you will run the assembled program under CodeView and step through
           each instruction in the program. For your lab report: you will include a listing of each pro-
           gram and describe the operation of each statement including data loaded into any affected
           registers or values stored away into memory.
              The following paragraphs describe one experimental run – stepping through the
           pgm5_1.asm program. Your lab report should contain similar information for all eight
           sample programs.
               To assemble your programs, use the ML command with the /Zi option. For example,
           to assemble the first sample program you would use the following DOS command:
                               ml /Zi pgm5_1.asm
           This command produces the pgm5_1.exe file that contains CodeView debugging informa-
           tion. You can load this program into the CodeView debugger using the following com-
           mand:
                               cv pgm5_1
           Once you are inside CodeView, you can single step through the program by repeatedly
           pressing the F8 key. Each time you press the F8 key, CodeView executes a single instruc-
           tion in the program.
               To better observe the results while stepping through your program, you should open
           the register window. If it is not open already, you can open it by pressing the F2 key. As the
           instructions you execute modify the registers, you can observe the changes.
              All the sample programs begin with a three-instruction sequence that initializes the
           DS and ES registers; pressing the F8 key three times steps over these instructions and (on
           one system) loads the AX, ES, and DS registers with the value 1927h (this value will
           change on different systems).
               Single stepping over the lea bx, L instruction loads the value 0015h into bx. Single step-
           ping over the group of instructions following the lea produces the following results:
                               mov         ax, [bx]                   ;AX =   0
                               add         ax, 2[bx]                  ;AX =   1
                               add         ax, 4[bx]                  ;AX =   3
                               add         ax, 6[bx]                  ;AX =   6
                               mul         K                          ;AX =   18 (hex)
                               mov         J, ax                      ;J is   now equal to 18h.

           Comments on the above instructions: this code loads bx with the base address of array L
           and then proceeds to compute the sum of L[i], i=0..3 (0+1+2+3). It then multiples this sum
           by K (4) and stores the result into J. Note that you can use the “dw J” command in the
           command window to display J’s current value (the “J” must be upper case because Code-
           View is case sensitive).

                               les         bx, PtrVar2                ;BX = 0015, ES = 1927
                               mov         di, K                      ;DI = 4
                               mov         ax, es:[bx][di]            ;AX = 2




                                                                                                Page 237
Chapter 05

                Comments on the above code: The les instruction loads es:bx with the pointer variable
                PtrVar2. This variable contains the address of the L variable. Then this code loads di with
                the value of K and completes by loading the second element of L into ax.

                                     mov        c1, ' '
                                     mov        al, c2
                                     mov        c3, al
                These three instructions simply store a space into byte variable c1 (verify with a “da c1”
                command in the command window) and they copy the value in c2 (“A”) into the AL reg-
                ister and the c3 variable (verified with “da c3” command).
                    For your lab report: assemble and step through pgm5_2.asm, pgm5_3.asm,
                pgm5_4.asm, pgm5_5.asm, pgm5_6.asm, pgm5_7.asm, and pgm5_8.asm. Describe the
                results in a fashion similar to the above.



5.9        Programming Projects
      1)        The PC’s video display is a memory mapped I/O device. That is, the display adapter maps
                each character on the text display to a word in memory. The display is an 80x25 array of
                words declared as follows:

                        display:array[0..24,0..79] of word;
                Display[0,0] corresponds to the upper left hand corner of the screen, display[0,79] is the
                upper right hand corner, display[24,0] is the lower left hand corner, and display[24,79] is
                the lower right hand corner of the display.
                The L.O. byte of each word holds the ASCII code of the character to appear on the screen.
                The H.O. byte of each word contains the attribute byte (see “The PC Video Display” on
                page 1247 for more details on the attribute byte). The base address of this array is B000:0
                for monochrome displays and B800:0 for color displays.
                The Chapter Five subdirectory contains a file named PGM5_1.ASM. This file is a skeletal
                program that manipulates the PC’s video display. This program, when complete, writes a
                series of period to the screen and then it writes a series of blues spaces to the screen. It con-
                tains a main program that uses several instructions you probably haven’t seen yet. These
                instructions essentially execute a for loop as follows:
                        for i:= 0 to 79 do
                                  for j := 0 to 24 do
                                           putscreen(i,j,value);
                Inside this program you will find some comments that instruct you to supply the code
                that stores the value in AX to location display[i,j]. Modify this program as described in its
                comments and test the result.
                For this project, you need to declare two word variables, I and J, in the data segment. Then
                you will need to modify the “PutScreen” procedure. Inside this procedure, as directed by
                the comments in the file, you will need to compute the index into the screen array and
                then store the value in the ax register to location es:[bx+0] (assuming you’ve computed the
                index into bx). Note that es:[0] is the base address of the video display in this procedure.
                Check your code carefully before attempting to run it. If your code malfunctions, it may
                crash the system and you will have to reboot. This program, if operating properly, will fill
                the screen with periods and wait until you press a key. Then it will fill the screen with blue
                spaces. You should probably execute the DOS “CLS” (clear screen) command after this
                program executes properly. Note that there is a working version of this program named
                p5_1.exe in the Chapter Five directory. You can run this program to check out it’s opera-
                tion if you are having problems.
      2)        The Chapter Five subdirectory contains a file named PGM5_2.ASM. This file is a program
                (except for two short subroutines) that generates mazes and solves them on the screen.
                This program requires that you complete two subroutines: MazeAdrs and ScrnAdrs.
                These two procedures appear at the beginning of the file; you should ignore the remainder


Page 238
                                                                                 Variables and Data Structures

            of this program. When the program calls the MazeAdrs function, it passes an X coordinate
            in the dx register and a Y-coordinate in the cx register. You need to compute the index into
            an 27x82 array defined as follows:
                     maze:array[0..26, 0..81] of word;
            Return the index in the ax register. Do not access the maze array; the calling code will do that for
            you.
            The ScrnAdrs function is almost identical to the MazeAdrs function except it computes an
            index into a 25x80 array rather than a 27x82 array. As with MazeAdrs, the X-coordinate
            will be in the dx register and the Y-coordinate will be in the cx register.
            Complete these two functions, assemble the program, and run it. Be sure to check your
            work over carefully. If you make any mistakes you will probably crash the system.
   3)       Create a program with a single dimension array of structures. Place at least four fields
            (your choice) in the structure. Write a code segment to access element “i” (“i” being a
            word variable) in the array.
   4)       Write a program which copies the data from a 3x3 array and stores the data into a second
            3x3 array. For the first 3x3 array, store the data in row major order. For the second 3x3
            array, store the data in column major order. Use nine sequences of instructions which fetch
            the word at location (i,j) (i=0..2, j=0..2).
   5)       Rewrite the code sequence above just using MOV instructions. Read and write the array
            locations directly, do not perform the array address computations.



5.10    Summary
                This chapter presents an 80x86-centric view of memory organization and data struc-
            tures. This certainly isn’t a complete course on data structures. This chapter discussed the
            primitive and simple composite data types and how to declare and use them in your pro-
            gram. Lots of additional information on the declaration and use of simple data types
            appears later in this text.
                One of the main goals of this chapter is to describe how to declare and use variables in
            an assembly language program. In an assembly language program you can easily create
            byte, word, double word, and other types of variables. Such scalar data types support
            boolean, character, integer, real, and other single data types found in typical high level
            languages. See:
                     •   “Declaring Variables in an Assembly Language Program” on page 196
                     •   “Declaring and using BYTE Variables” on page 198
                     •   “Declaring and using WORD Variables” on page 200
                     •   “Declaring and using DWORD Variables” on page 201
                     •   “Declaring and using FWORD, QWORD, and TBYTE Variables” on
                         page 202
                     •   “Declaring Floating Point Variables with REAL4, REAL8, and REAL10”
                         on page 202
               For those who don’t like using variable type names like byte, word, etc., MASM lets
            you create your own type names. You want to call them Integers rather than Words? No
            problem, you can define your own type names use the typedef statement. See:
                     •   “Creating Your Own Type Names with TYPEDEF” on page 203
                Another important data type is the pointer. Pointers are nothing more than memory
            addresses stored in variables (word or double word variables). The 80x86 CPUs support
            two types of pointers – near and far pointers. In real mode, near pointers are 16 bits long
            and contain the offset into a known segment (typically the data segment). Far pointers are
            32 bits long and contain a full segment:offset logical address. Remember that you must
            use one of the register indirect or indexed addressing modes to access the data referenced
            by a pointer. For those who want to create their own pointer types (rather than simply


                                                                                                      Page 239
Chapter 05

             using word and dword to declare near and far pointers), the typedef instruction lets
             you create named pointer types. See:
                     •   “Pointer Data Types” on page 203
                  A composite data type is one made up from other data types. Examples of composite
             data types abound, but two of the more popular composite data types are arrays and
             structures (records). An array is a group of variables, all the same type. A program selects
             an element of an array using an integer index into that array. Structures, on the other
             hand, may contain fields whose types are different. In a program, you select the desired
             field by supplying a field name with the dot operator. See:
                     •   “Arrays” on page 206
                     •   “Multidimensional Arrays” on page 210
                     •   “Structures” on page 218
                     •   “Arrays of Structures and Arrays/Structures as Structure Fields” on
                         page 220
                     •   “Pointers to Structures” on page 221




Page 240
                                                                              Variables and Data Structures


5.11     Questions
   1)         In what segment (8086) would you normally place your variables?
   2)         Which segment in the SHELL.ASM file normally corresponds to the segment containing
              your variables?
   3)         Describe how to declare byte variables. Give several examples. What would you normally
              use byte variables for in a program?
   4)         Describe how to declare word variables. Give several examples. Describe what you would
              use them for in a program.
   5)         Repeat question 21 for double word variables.
   6)         Explain the purpose of the TYPEDEF statement. Give several examples of its use.
   7)         What is a pointer variable?
   8)         What is the difference between a near and a far pointer?
   9)         How do you access the object pointed at by a far pointer. Give an example using 8086
              instructions.
   10)        What is a composite data type?
   11)        How do you declare arrays in assembly language? Give the code for the following arrays:
              a) A two dimensional 4x4 array of bytes b) An array containing 128 double words
              c) An array containing 16 words          d) A 4x5x6 three dimensional array of words
   12)        Describe how you would access a single element of each of the above arrays. Provide the
              necessary formulae and 8086 code to access said element (assume variable I is the index
              into single dimension arrays, I & J provide the index into two dimension arrays, and I, J, &
              K provide the index into the three dimensional array). Assume row major ordering, where
              appropriate.
   13)        Provide the 80386 code, using the scaled indexing modes, to access the elements of the
              above arrays.
   14)        Explain the difference between row major and column major array ordering.
   15)        Suppose you have a two-dimensional array whose values you want to initialize as fol-
              lows:

               012
               345
               678

              Provide the variable declaration to accomplish this. Note: Do not use 8086 machine
              instructions to initialize the array. Initialize the array in your data segment.
              Date=               Record
                                                Month:integer;
                                                Day:integer;
                                                Year:integer;
                                  end;

              Time=               Record
                                                Hours:integer;
                                                Minutes:integer;
                                                Seconds:integer;
                                  end;

              VideoTape =                   record
                                              Title:string[25];
                                              ReleaseDate:Date;
                                              Price:Real; (* Assume four byte reals *)


                                                                                                  Page 241
Chapter 05

                                             Length: Time;
                                             Rating:char;
                                           end;

             TapeLibrary : array [0..127] of VideoTape; (*This is a variable!*)

    17)      Suppose ES:BX points at an object of type VideoTape. What is the instruction that properly
             loads the Rating field into AL?




Page 242
