Procedures: Advanced Topics                                                                Chapter 12
                    The last chapter described how to create procedures, pass parameters, and allocate
                and access local variables. This chapter picks up where that one left off and describes how
                to access non-local variables in other procedures, pass procedures as parameters, and
                implement some user-defined control structures.


12.0   Chapter Overview

                    This chapter completes the discussion of procedures, parameters, and local variables
                begun in the previous chapter. This chapter describes how block structured languages like
                Pascal, Modula-2, Algol, and Ada access local and non-local variables. This chapter also
                describes how to implement a user-defined control structure, the iterator. Most of the
                material in this chapter is of interest to compiler writers and those who want to learn how
                compilers generate code for certain types of program constructs. Few pure assembly lan-
                guage programs will use the techniques this chapter describes. Therefore, none of the
                material in this chapter is particularly important to those who are just learning assembly
                language. However, if you are going to write a compiler, or you want to learn how compil-
                ers generate code so you can write efficient HLL programs, you will want to learn the
                material in this chapter sooner or later.
                    This chapter begins by discussing the notion of scope and how HLLs like Pascal access
                variables in nested procedures. The first section discusses the concept of lexical nesting
                and the use of static links and displays to access non-local variables. Next, this chapter
                discusses how to pass variables at different lex levels as parameters. The third section dis-
                cusses how to pass parameters of one procedure as parameters to another procedure. The
                fourth major topic this chapter covers is passing procedures as parameters. This chapter
                concludes with a discussion of iterators, a user-defined control structure.
                    This chapter assumes a familiarity with a block structured language like Pascal or
                Ada. If your only HLL experience is with a non-block structured language like C, C++,
                BASIC, or FORTRAN, some of the concepts in this chapter may be completely new and
                you will have trouble understanding them. Any introductory text on Pascal or Ada will
                help explain any concept you don’t understand that this chapter assumes is a prerequisite.



12.1   Lexical Nesting, Static Links, and Displays
                    In block structured languages like Pascal1 it is possible to nest procedures and func-
                tions. Nesting one procedure within another limits the access to the nested procedure; you
                cannot access the nested procedure from outside the enclosing procedure. Likewise, vari-
                ables you declare within a procedure are visible inside that procedure and to all proce-
                dures nested within that procedure2. This is the standard block structured language
                notion of scope that should be quite familiar to anyone who has written Pascal or Ada pro-
                grams.
                    There is a good deal of complexity hidden behind the concept of scope, or lexical nest-
                ing, in a block structured language. While accessing a local variable in the current activa-
                tion record is efficient, accessing global variables in a block structured language can be
                very inefficient. This section will describe how a HLL like Pascal deals with non-local
                identifiers and how to access global variables and call non-local procedures and functions.



   1. Note that C and C++ are not block structured languages. Other block structured languages include Algol, Ada,
   and Modula-2.
   2. Subject, of course, to the limitation that you not reuse the identifier within the nested procedure.


                                                                                                        Page 639

                          Thi d         t         t d ith F      M k    402
Chapter 12


12.1.1       Scope

                      Scope in most high level languages is a static, or compile-time concept3. Scope is the
                 notion of when a name is visible, or accessible, within a program. This ability to hide
                 names is useful in a program because it is often convenient to reuse certain (non-descrip-
                 tive) names. The i variable used to control most for loops in high level languages is a per-
                 fect example. Throughout this chapter you’ve seen equates like xyz_i, xyz_j, etc. The reason
                 for choosing such names is that MASM doesn’t support the same notion of scoped names
                 as high level languages. Fortunately, MASM 6.x and later does support scoped names.
                      By default, MASM 6.x treats statement labels (those with a colon after them) as local
                 to a procedure. That is, you may only reference such labels within the procedure in which
                 they are declared. This is true even if you nest one procedure inside another. Fortunately, there
                 is no good reason why anyone would want to nest procedures in a MASM program.
                      Having local labels within a procedure is nice. It allows you to reuse statement labels
                 (e.g., loop labels and such) without worrying about name conflicts with other procedures.
                 Sometimes, however, you may want to turn off the scoping of names in a procedure; a
                 good example is when you have a case statement whose jump table appears outside the
                 procedure. If the case statement labels are local to the procedure, they will not be visible
                 outside the procedure and you cannot use them in the case statement jump table (see
                 “CASE Statements” on page 525). There are two ways you can turn off the scoping of
                 labels in MASM 6.x. The first way is to include the statement in your program:
                                       option         noscoped
                 This will turn off variable scoping from that point forward in your program’s source file.
                 You can turn scoping back on with a statement of the form
                                       option         scoped
                 By placing these statements around your procedure you can selectively control scoping.
                      Another way to control the scoping of individual names is to place a double colon
                 (“::”) after a label. This informs the assembler that this particular name should be global to
                 the enclosing procedure.
                     MASM, like the C programming language, supports three levels of scope: public, glo-
                 bal (or static), and local. Local symbols are visible only within the procedure they are
                 defined. Global symbols are accessible throughout a source file, but are not visible in other
                 program modules. Public symbols are visible throughout a program, across modules.
                 MASM uses the following default scoping rules:
                          •    By default, statement labels appearing in a procedure are local to that
                               procedure.
                          •    By default, all procedure names are public.
                          •    By default, most other symbols are global.
                 Note that these rules apply to MASM 6.x only. Other assemblers and earlier versions of
                 MASM follow different rules.
                     Overriding the default on the first rule above is easy – either use the option noscoped
                 statement or use a double colon to make a label global. You should be aware, though, that
                 you cannot make a local label public using the public or externdef directives. You must
                 make the symbol global (using either technique) before you make it public.
                     Having all procedure names public by default usually isn’t much of a problem. How-
                 ever, it might turn out that you want to use the same (local) procedure name in several dif-
                 ferent modules. If MASM automatically makes such names public, the linker will give you
                 an error because there are multiple public procedures with the same name. You can turn
                 on and off this default action using the following statements:
                                       option         proc:private               ;procedures are global

    3. There are languages that support dynamic, or run-time, scope; this text will not consider such languages.


Page 640
                                                                                    Procedures: Advanced Topics




                               One:

                                               Two:
                                                locals in Two: J, Parm
                                                Globals in Two: I, Entry, One


                                 Locals in One: Entry, I, J, Two


Figure 12.1 Identifier Scope
                                      option          proc:export               ;procedures are public
               Note that some debuggers only provide symbolic information if a procedure’s name is
               public. This is why MASM 6.x defaults to public names. This problem does not exist with
               CodeView; so you can use whichever default is most convenient. Of course, if you elect to
               keep procedure names private (global only), then you will need to use the public or extern-
               def directive to make desired procedure names public.
                    This discussion of local, global, and public symbols applies mainly to statement and
               procedure labels. It does not apply to variables you’ve declared in your data segment,
               equates, macros, typedefs, or most other symbols. Such symbols are always global regard-
               less of where you define them. The only way to make them public is to specify their names
               in a public or externdef directive.
                   There is a way to declare parameter names and local variables, allocated on the stack,
               such that their names are local to a given procedure. See the proc directive in the MASM
               reference manual for details.
                   The scope of a name limits its visibility within a program. That is, a program has
               access to a variable name only within that name’s scope. Outside the scope, the program
               cannot access that name. Many programming languages, like Pascal and C++, allow you
               to reuse identifiers if the scopes of those multiple uses do not overlap. As you’ve seen,
               MASM provides some minimal scoping features for statement labels. There is, however,
               another issue related to scope: address binding and variable lifetime. Address binding is the
               process of associating a memory address with a variable name. Variable lifetime is that
               portion of a program’s execution during which a memory location is bound to a variable.
               Consider the following Pascal procedures:
               procedure One(Entry:integer);
               var
                      i,j:integer;
                       procedure Two(Parm:integer);
                       var j:integer;
                       begin
                                      for j:= 0 to 5 do writeln(i+j);
                                      if Parm < 10 then One(Parm+1);
                       end;
               begin {One}
                      for i := 1 to 5 do Two(Entry);
               end;
               Figure 12.1 shows the scope of identifiers One, Two, Entry, i, j, and Parm.
               The local variable j in Two masks the identifier j in procedure One while inside Two.




                                                                                                      Page 641
Chapter 12


12.1.2       Unit Activation, Address Binding, and Variable Lifetime

                    Unit activation is the process of calling a procedure or function. The combination of
                an activation record and some executing code is considered an instance of a routine. When
                unit activation occurs a routine binds machine addresses to its local variables. Address
                binding (for local variables) occurs when the routine adjusts the stack pointer to make
                room for the local variables. The lifetime of those variables is from that point until the rou-
                tine destroys the activation record eliminating the local variable storage.
                     Although scope limits the visibility of a name to a certain section of code and does not
                allow duplicate names within the same scope, this does not mean that there is only one
                address bound to a name. It is quite possible to have several addresses bound to the same
                name at the same time. Consider a recursive procedure call. On each activation the proce-
                dure builds a new activation record. Since the previous instance still exists, there are now
                two activation records on the stack containing local variables for that procedure. As addi-
                tional recursive activations occur, the system builds more activation records each with an
                address bound to the same name. To resolve the possible ambiguity (which address do
                you access when operating on the variable?), the system always manipulates the variable
                in the most recent activation record.
                     Note that procedures One and Two in the previous section are indirectly recursive. That
                is, they both call routines which, in turn, call themselves. Assuming the parameter to One
                is less than 10 on the initial call, this code will generate multiple activation records (and,
                therefore, multiple copies of the local variables) on the stack. For example, were you to
                issue the call One(9), the stack would look like Figure 12.2 upon first encountering the end
                associated with the procedure Two.
                    As you can see, there are several copies of I and J on the stack at this point. Procedure
                Two (the currently executing routine) would access J in the most recent activation record
                that is at the bottom of Figure 12.2. The previous instance of Two will only access the vari-
                able J in its activation record when the current instance returns to One and then back to
                Two.
                     The lifetime of a variable’s instance is from the point of activation record creation to
                the point of activation record destruction. Note that the first instance of J above (the one at
                the top of the diagram above) has the longest lifetime and that the lifetimes of all instances
                of J overlap.


12.1.3       Static Links

                    Pascal will allow procedure Two access to I in procedure One. However, when there is
                the possibility of recursion there may be several instances of i on the stack. Pascal, of
                course, will only let procedure Two access the most recent instance of i. In the stack dia-
                gram in Figure 12.2, this corresponds to the value of i in the activation record that begins
                with “One(9+1) parameter.” The only problem is how do you know where to find the activation
                record containing i?
                     A quick, but poorly thought out answer, is to simply index backwards into the stack.
                After all, you can easily see in the diagram above that i is at offset eight from Two’s activa-
                tion record. Unfortunately, this is not always the case. Assume that procedure Three also
                calls procedure Two and the following statement appears within procedure One:
                        If (Entry <5) then Three(Entry*2) else Two(Entry);
                With this statement in place, it’s quite possible to have two different stack frames upon
                entry into procedure Two: one with the activation record for procedure Three sandwiched
                between One and Two’s activation records and one with the activation records for proce-
                dures One and Two adjacent to one another. Clearly a fixed offset from Two’s activation
                record will not always point at the i variable on One’s most recent activation record.



Page 642
                                                                                 Procedures: Advanced Topics




                              Previous Stack Contents

                                         9
                                                              One(9) parameter
                                  Return Address

                                  Saved BP Value
                                 "I" Local Variable         One Activation Record
                                 "J" Local Variable
                                        9                     Two(9) parameter
                                   Return Address
                                                            Two Activation Record
                                  Saved BP Value
                                 "J" Local Variable

                                         10                   One(9+1) parameter
                                  Return Address
                                  Saved BP Value            One Activation Record
                                 "I" Local Variable

                                 "J" Local Variable
                                        1
                                                              Two(9+1) parameter
                                        0
                                   Return Address
                                                            Two Activation Record
                                  Saved BP Value
                                 "J" Local Variable



Figure 12.2 Indirect Recursion
                    The astute reader might notice that the saved bp value in Two’s activation record
               points at the caller’s activation record. You might think you could use this as a pointer to
               One’s activation record. But this scheme fails for the same reason the fixed offset technique
               fails. Bp’s old value, the dynamic link, points at the caller’s activation record. Since the
               caller isn’t necessarily the enclosing procedure the dynamic link might not point at the
               enclosing procedure’s activation record.
                   What is really needed is a pointer to the enclosing procedure’s activation record.
               Many compilers for block structured languages create such a pointer, the static link. Con-
               sider the following Pascal code:
               procedure Parent;
               var i,j:integer;
                       procedure Child1;
                       var j:integer;
                       begin
                                   for j := 0 to 2 do writeln(i);
                       end {Child1};
                       procedure Child2;
                       var i:integer;
                       begin
                                   for i := 0 to 1 do Child1;
                       end {Child2};

                                                                                                   Page 643
Chapter 12




                                        Previous Stack Contents



                                      Activation record for Parent




                                      Activation record for Child2




                                      Activation record for Child1

                                                                                   SP


 Figure 12.3 Activation Records after Several Nested Calls

                  begin {Parent}
                           Child2;
                           Child1;
                  end;
                  Just after entering Child1 for the first time, the stack would look like Figure 12.3. When
                  Child1 attempts to access the variable i from Parent, it will need a pointer, the static link, to
                  Parent’s activation record. Unfortunately, there is no way for Child1, upon entry, to figure
                  out on it’s own where Parent’s activation record lies in memory. It will be necessary for the
                  caller (Child2 in this example) to pass the static link to Child1. In general, the callee can treat
                  the static link as just another parameter; usually pushed on the stack immediately before
                  executing the call instruction.
                      To fully understand how to pass static links from call to call, you must first under-
                  stand the concept of a lexical level. Lexical levels in Pascal correspond to the static nesting
                  levels of procedures and functions. Most compiler writers specify lex level zero as the
                  main program. That is, all symbols you declare in your main program exist at lex level
                  zero. Procedure and function names appearing in your main program define lex level one,
                  no matter how many procedures or functions appear in the main program. They all begin a new
                  copy of lex level one. For each level of nesting, Pascal introduces a new lex level.
                  Figure 12.4 shows this.
                  During execution, a program may only access variables at a lex level less than or equal to
                  the level of the current routine. Furthermore, only one set of values at any given lex level
                  are accessible at any one time4 and those values are always in the most recent activation
                  record at that lex level.
                       Before worrying about how to access non-local variables using a static link, you need
                  to figure out how to pass the static link as a parameter. When passing the static link as a
                  parameter to a program unit (procedure or function), there are three types of calling
                  sequences to worry about:
                           •    A program unit calls a child procedure or function. If the current lex level
                                is n, then a child procedure or function is at lex level n+1 and is local to


    4. There is one exception. If you have a pointer to a variable and the pointer remains accessible, you can access the
    data it points at even if the variable actually holding that data is inaccessible. Of course, in (standard) Pascal you
    cannot take the address of a local variable and put it into a pointer. However, certain dialects of Pascal (e.g.,
    Turbo) and other block structured languages will allow this operation.


Page 644
                                                                                Procedures: Advanced Topics




                                                                                   Lex Level Zero

                                                                                   Lex Level One

                                                                                   Lex Level Two


                                                                               Note: Each rectangle
                                                                               represents a procedure
                                                                               or function.




Figure 12.4 Procedure Schematic Showing Lexical Levels




                                 Previous Stack Contents

                                         Parameters

                                          Static Link
                                     Return Address
                                 Dynamic Link (Old BP)

                                        Local variables



                              Any Registers Saved on Stack
                                                                        SP


Figure 12.5 Generic Activation Record
                          the current program unit. Note that most block structured languages do
                          not allow calling procedures or functions at lex levels greater than n+1.
                      •   A program unit calls a peer procedure or function. A peer procedure or
                          function is one at the same lexical level as the current caller and a single
                          program unit encloses both program units.
                      •   A program unit calls an ancestor procedure or function. An ancestor unit
                          is either the parent unit, a parent of an ancestor unit, or a peer of an ances-
                          tor unit.
              Calling sequences for the first two types of calls above are very simple. For the sake of this
              example, assume the activation record for these procedures takes the generic form in
              Figure 12.5.
                  When a parent procedure or function calls a child program unit, the static link is noth-
              ing more than the value in the bp register immediately prior to the call. Therefore, to pass
              the static link to the child unit, just push bp before executing the call instruction:




                                                                                                    Page 645
Chapter 12



                                       Lex Level 0

                                       Lex Level 1

                                       Lex Level 2       Eac h box represents an
                                                         activation record.
                                       Lex Level 3

                                       Lex Level 3       Each arror represents
                                                         a static link.
                                       Lex Level 4

                                       Lex Level 5

                                       Lex Level 5

                                       Lex Level 5

 Figure 12.6 Static Links

                        <Push Other Parameters onto the stack>
                                  push     bp
                                  call     ChildUnit
                Of course the child unit can process the static link off the stack just like any other parame-
                ter. In this case, that the static and dynamic links are exactly the same. In general, how-
                ever, this is not true.
                     If a program unit calls a peer procedure or function, the current value in bp is not the
                static link. It is a pointer to the caller’s local variables and the peer procedure cannot
                access those variables. However, as peers, the caller and callee share the same parent pro-
                gram unit, so the caller can simply push a copy of its static link onto the stack before call-
                ing the peer procedure or function. The following code will do this, assuming all
                procedures and functions are near:
                        <Push Other Parameters onto the Stack>
                                  push     [bp+4]                            ;Push static link onto stk.
                                  call     PeerUnit
                If the procedure or function is far, the static link would be two bytes farther up the stack,
                so you would need to use the following code:
                        <Push Other Parameters onto the Stack>
                                  push     [bp+6]                            ;Push static link onto stk.
                                  call     PeerUnit
                    Calling an ancestor is a little more complex. If you are currently at lex level n and you
                wish to call an ancestor at lex level m (m < n), you will need to traverse the list of static
                links to find the desired activation record. The static links form a list of activation records.
                By following this chain of activation records until it ends, you can step through the most
                recent activation records of all the enclosing procedures and functions of a particular pro-
                gram unit. The stack diagram in Figure 12.6 shows the static links for a sequence of proce-
                dure calls statically nested five lex levels deep.
                     If the program unit currently executing at lex level five wishes to call a procedure at
                lex level three, it must push a static link to the most recently activated program unit at lex
                level two. In order to find this static link you will have to traverse the chain of static links.
                If you are at lex level n and you want to call a procedure at lex level m you will have to
                traverse (n-m)+1 static links. The code to accomplish this is




Page 646
                                                                              Procedures: Advanced Topics

            ; Current lex level is 5. This code locates the static link for,
            ; and then calls a procedure at lex level 2. Assume all calls are
            ; near:
                     <Push necessary parameters>
                                mov        bx, [bp+4]       ;Traverse static link to LL 4.
                                mov        bx, ss:[bx+4]    ;To Lex Level 3.
                                mov        bx, ss:[bx+4]    ;To Lex Level 2.
                                push       ss:[bx+4]        ;Ptr to most recent LL1 A.R.
                                call       ProcAtLL2
            Note the ss: prefix in the instructions above. Remember, the activation records are all in
            the stack segment and bx indexes the data segment by default.


12.1.4   Accessing Non-Local Variables Using Static Links

                 In order to access a non-local variable, you must traverse the chain of static links until
            you get a pointer to the desired activation record. This operation is similar to locating the
            static link for a procedure call outlined in the previous section, except you traverse only
            n-m static links rather than (n-m)+1 links to obtain a pointer to the appropriate activation
            record. Consider the following Pascal code:
            procedure Outer;
            var i:integer;
                     procedure Middle;
                     var j:integer;
                                procedure Inner;
                                var k:integer;
                                begin
                                           k := 3;
                                           writeln(i+j+k);
                                end;
                     begin {middle}
                                j := 2;
                                writeln(i+j);
                                Inner;
                     end; {middle}
            begin {Outer}
                     i := 1;
                     Middle;
            end; {Outer}
            The Inner procedure accesses global variables at lex level n-1 and n-2 (where n is the lex
            level of the Inner procedure). The Middle procedure accesses a single global variable at lex
            level m-1 (where m is the lex level of procedure Middle). The following assembly language
            code could implement these three procedures:
            Outer               proc       near
                                push       bp
                                mov        bp, sp
                                sub        sp, 2                        ;Make room for I.
                                mov        word ptr [bp-2],1            ;Set I to one.
                                push       bp                           ;Static link for Middle.
                                call       Middle
                                mov        sp, bp                       ;Remove local variables.
                                pop        bp
                                ret        2                            ;Remove static link on ret.
            Outer               endp
            Middle              proc       near


                                                                                                  Page 647
Chapter 12

                                     push       bp                           ;Save dynamic link
                                     mov        bp, sp                       ;Set up activation record.
                                     sub        sp, 2                        ;Make room for J.
                                     mov        word ptr [bp-2],2            ;J := 2;
                                     mov        bx, [bp+4]                   ;Get static link to prev LL.
                                     mov        ax, ss:[bx-2]                ;Get I’s value.
                                     add        ax, [bp-2]                   ;Add to J and then
                                     puti                                    ; print the sum.
                                     putcr
                                     push       bp                           ;Static link for Inner.
                                     call       Inner
                                     mov        sp, bp
                                     pop        bp
                                     ret        2                            ;Remove static link on RET.
                Middle               endp
                Inner                proc       near
                                     push       bp                           ;Save dynamic link
                                     mov        bp, sp                       ;Set up activation record.
                                     sub        sp, 2                        ;Make room for K.
                                     mov        word ptr [bp-2],2            ;K := 3;
                                     mov        bx, [bp+4]                   ;Get static link to prev LL.
                                     mov        ax, ss:[bx-2]                ;Get J’s value.
                                     add        ax, [bp-2]                   ;Add to K

                                     mov        bx, ss:[bx+4]                ;Get ptr to Outer’s Act Rec.
                                     add        ax, ss:[bx-2]                ;Add in I’s value and then
                                     puti                                    ; print the sum.
                                     putcr
                                     mov        sp, bp
                                     pop        bp
                                     ret        2                            ;Remove static link on RET.
                Inner                endp
                As you can see, accessing global variables can be very inefficient5.
                    Note that as the difference between the activation records increases, it becomes less
                and less efficient to access global variables. Accessing global variables in the previous acti-
                vation record requires only one additional instruction per access, at two lex levels you
                need two additional instructions, etc. If you analyze a large number of Pascal programs,
                you will find that most of them do not nest procedures and functions and in the ones
                where there are nested program units, they rarely access global variables. There is one
                major exception, however. Although Pascal procedures and functions rarely access local
                variables inside other procedures and functions, they frequently access global variables
                declared in the main program. Since such variables appear at lex level zero, access to such
                variables would be as inefficient as possible when using the static links. To solve this
                minor problem, most 80x86 based block structured languages allocate variables at lex
                level zero directly in the data segment and access them directly.


12.1.5       The Display

                    After reading the previous section you might get the idea that one should never use
                non-local variables, or limit non-local accesses to those variables declared at lex level zero.
                After all, it’s often easy enough to put all shared variables at lex level zero. If you are
                designing a programming language, you can adopt the C language designer’s philosophy
                and simply not provide block structure. Such compromises turn out to be unnecessary.
                There is a data structure, the display, that provides efficient access to any set of non-local
                variables.


    5. Indeed, perhaps one of the main reasons the C programming language is not block structured is because the
    language designers wanted to avoid inefficient access to non-local variables.


Page 648
                                                                               Procedures: Advanced Topics




                                                                     Lex Level 0

                                                                     Lex Level 1

                          Display                                    Lex Level 2

                      0                                              Lex Level 3
                      1
                      2                                              Lex Level 3
                      3
                      4                                              Lex Level 4
                      5
                      6    ????                                      Lex Level 5

                                                                     Lex Level 5

                                                                     Lex Level 5

Figure 12.7 The Display

                   A display is simply an array of pointers to activation records. Display[0] contains a
              pointer to the most recent activation record for lex level zero, Display[1] contains a pointer
              to the most recent activation record for lex level one, and so on. Assuming you’ve main-
              tained the Display array in the current data segment (always a good place to keep it) it only
              takes two instructions to access any non-local variable. Pictorially, the display works as
              shown in Figure 12.7.
              Note that the entries in the display always point at the most recent activation record for a
              procedure at the given lex level. If there is no active activation record for a particular lex
              level (e.g., lex level six above), then the entry in the display contains garbage.
                  The maximum lexical nesting level in your program determines how many elements
              there must be in the display. Most programs have only three or four nested procedures (if
              that many) so the display is usually quite small. Generally, you will rarely require more
              than 10 or so elements in the display.
                   Another advantage to using a display is that each individual procedure can maintain
              the display information itself, the caller need not get involved. When using static links the
              calling code has to compute and pass the appropriate static link to a procedure. Not only
              is this slow, but the code to do this must appear before every call. If your program uses a
              display, the callee, rather than the caller, maintains the display so you only need one copy
              of the code per procedure. Furthermore, as the next example shows, the code to handle
              the display is short and fast.
                   Maintaining the display is very easy. Upon initial entry into a procedure you must
              first save the contents of the display array at the current lex level and then store the
              pointer to the current activation record into that same spot. Accessing a non-local variable
              requires only two instructions, one to load an element of the display into a register and a
              second to access the variable. The following code implements the Outer, Middle, and Inner
              procedures from the static link examples.
              ;   Assume Outer is at lex level 1, Middle is at lex level 2, and
              ;   Inner is at lex level 3. Keep in mind that each entry in the
              ;   display is two bytes. Presumably, the variable Display is defined
              ;   in the data segment.

              Outer                 proc     near
                                    push     bp
                                    mov      bp, sp
                                    push     Display[2]                  ;Save current Display Entry
                                    sub      sp, 2                       ;Make room for I.



                                                                                                   Page 649
Chapter 12

                                   mov        word ptr [bp-4],1          ;Set I to one.
                                   call       Middle
                                   add        sp, 2                      ;Remove local variables
                                   pop        Display[2]                 ;Restore previous value.
                                   pop        bp
                                   ret
                Outer              endp
                Middle             proc       near
                                   push       bp                         ;Save dynamic link.
                                   mov        bp, sp                     ;Set up our activation
                record.
                                   push       Display[4]                 ;Save old Display value.
                                   sub        sp, 2                      ;Make room for J.
                                   mov        word ptr [bp-2],2          ;J := 2;
                                   mov        bx, Display[2]             ;Get static link to prev LL.
                                   mov        ax, ss:[bx-4]              ;Get I’s value.
                                   add        ax, [bp-2]                 ;Add to J and then
                                   puti                                  ; print the sum.
                                   putcr
                                   call       Inner
                                   add        sp, 2                      ;Remnove local variable.
                                   pop        Display[4]                 ;Restore old Display value.
                                   pop        bp
                                   ret
                Middle             endp
                Inner              proc       near
                                   push       bp                         ;Save dynamic link
                                   mov        bp, sp                     ;Set up activation record.
                                   push       Display[6]                 ;Save old display value
                                   sub        sp, 2                      ;Make room for K.
                                   mov        word ptr [bp-2],2          ;K := 3;
                                   mov        bx, Display[4]             ;Get static link to prev LL.
                                   mov        ax, ss:[bx-4]              ;Get J’s value.
                                   add        ax, [bp-2]                 ;Add to K
                                   mov        bx, Display[2]             ;Get ptr to Outer’s Act Rec.
                                   add        ax, ss:[bx-4]              ;Add in I’s value and then
                                   puti                                  ; print the sum.
                                   putcr
                                   add        sp, 2
                                   pop        Display [6]
                                   pop        bp
                                   ret
                Inner              endp
                Although this code doesn’t look particularly better than the former code, using a display
                is often much more efficient than using static links.


12.1.6       The 80286 ENTER and LEAVE Instructions

                    When designing the 80286, Intel’s CPU designers decided to add two instructions to
                help maintain displays. Unfortunately, although their design works, is very general, and
                only requires data in the stack segment, it is very slow; much slower than using the tech-
                niques in the previous section. Although many non-optimizing compilers use these
                instructions, the best compilers avoid using them, if possible.
                     The leave instruction is very simple to understand. It performs the same operation as
                the two instructions:
                                   mov        sp, bp
                                   pop        bp
                Therefore, you may use the instruction for the standard procedure exit code if you have an
                80286 or later microprocessor. On an 80386 or earlier processor, the leave instruction is

Page 650
                                                                    Procedures: Advanced Topics

shorter and faster than the equivalent move and pop sequence. However, the leave
instruction is slower on 80486 and later processors.
    The enter instruction takes two operands. The first is the number of bytes of local stor-
age the current procedure requires, the second is the lex level of the current procedure.
The enter instruction does the following:
; ENTER Locals, LexLevel
                     push       bp               ;Save dynamic link.
                     mov        tempreg, sp      ;Save for later.
                     cmp        LexLevel, 0      ;Done if this is lex level zero.
                     je         Lex0
lp:                  dec        LexLevel
                     jz         Done             ;Quit if at last lex level.
                     sub        bp, 2            ;Index into display in prev act rec
                     push       [bp]             ; and push each element there.
                     jmp        lp               ;Repeat for each entry.
Done:                push       tempreg          ;Add entry for current lex level.
Lex0:                mov        bp, tempreg      ;Ptr to current act rec.
                     sub        sp, Locals       ;Allocate local storage
As you can see from this code, the enter instruction copies the display from activation
record to activation record. This can get quite expensive if you nest the procedures to any
depth. Most HLLs, if they use the enter instruction at all, always specify a nesting level of
zero to avoid copying the display throughout the stack.
    The enter instruction puts the value for the display[n] entry at location BP-(n*2). The
enter instruction does not copy the value for display[0] into each stack frame. Intel assumes that
you will keep the main program’s global variables in the data segment. To save time and
memory, they do not bother copying the display[0] entry.
     The enter instruction is very slow, particularly on 80486 and later processors. If you
really want to copy the display from activation record to activation record it is probably a
better idea to push the items yourself. The following code snippets show how to do this:
; enter n, 0         ;14 cycles on the 486
                     push       bp               ;1 cycle on the 486
                     sub        sp, n            ;1 cycle on the 486
; enter n, 1         ;17 cycles on the 486
                     push       bp               ;1   cycle on the 486
                     push       [bp-2]           ;4   cycles on the 486
                     mov        bp, sp           ;1   cycle on the 486
                     add        bp, 2            ;1   cycle on the 486
                     sub        sp, n            ;1   cycle on the 486
; enter n, 2         ;20 cycles on the 486
                     push       bp               ;1   cycle on the 486
                     push       [bp-2]           ;4   cycles on the 486
                     push       [bp-4]           ;4   cycles on the 486
                     mov        bp, sp           ;1   cycle on the 486
                     add        bp, 4            ;1   cycle on the 486
                     sub        sp, n            ;1   cycle on the 486
; enter n, 3         ;23 cycles on the 486
                     push       bp               ;1   cycle on the 486
                     push       [bp-2]           ;4   cycles on the 486
                     push       [bp-4]           ;4   cycles on the 486
                     push       [bp-6]           ;4   cycles on the 486
                     mov        bp, sp           ;1   cycle on the 486
                     add        bp, 6            ;1   cycle on the 486
                     sub        sp, n            ;1   cycle on the 486




                                                                                        Page 651
Chapter 12

                 ; enter n, 4           ;26 cycles on the 486
                                        push        bp              ;1   cycle on the 486
                                        push        [bp-2]          ;4   cycles on the 486
                                        push        [bp-4]          ;4   cycles on the 486
                                        push        [bp-6]          ;4   cycles on the 486
                                        push        [bp-8]          ;4   cycles on the 486
                                        mov         bp, sp          ;1   cycle on the 486
                                        add         bp, 8           ;1   cycle on the 486
                                        sub         sp, n           ;1   cycle on the 486
                 ; etc.
                      If you are willing to believe Intel’s cycle timings, you can see that the enter instruction
                 is almost never faster than a straight line sequence of instructions that accomplish the
                 same thing. If you are interested in saving space rather than writing fast code, the enter
                 instruction is generally a better alternative. The same is generally true for the leave
                 instruction as well. It is only one byte long, but it is slower than the corresponding
                 mov bp,sp and pop bp instructions.
                     Accessing non-local variables using the displays created by enter appears in the exer-
                 cises.



12.2     Passing Variables at Different Lex Levels as Parameters.
                      Accessing variables at different lex levels in a block structured program introduces
                 several complexities to a program. The previous section introduced you to the complexity
                 of non-local variable access. This problem gets even worse when you try to pass such vari-
                 ables as parameters to another program unit. The following subsections discuss strategies
                 for each of the major parameter passing mechanisms.
                     For the purposes of discussion, the following sections will assume that “local” refers
                 to variables in the current activation record, “global” refers to variables in the data seg-
                 ment, and “intermediate” refers to variables in some activation record other than the cur-
                 rent activation record. Note that the following sections will not assume that ds is equal to
                 ss. These sections will also pass all parameters on the stack. You can easily modify the
                 details to pass these parameters elsewhere.


12.2.1       Passing Parameters by Value in a Block Structured Language

                     Passing value parameters to a program unit is no more difficult than accessing the
                 corresponding variables; all you need do is push the value on the stack before calling the
                 associated procedure.
                      To pass a global variable by value to another procedure, you could use code like the
                 following:
                                        push        GlobalVar        ;Assume “GlobalVar” is in DSEG.
                                        call        Procedure
                 To pass a local variable by value to another procedure, you could use the following code6:
                                        push        [bp-2]           ;Local variable in current activation
                                        call        Procedure        ; record.
                     To pass an intermediate variable as a value parameter, you must first locate that inter-
                 mediate variable’s activation record and then push its value onto the stack. The exact
                 mechanism you use depends on whether you are using static links or a display to keep
                 track of the intermediate variable’s activation records. If using static links, you might use



    6. The non-global examples all assume the variable is at offset -2 in their activation record. Change this as appro-
    priate in your code.


Page 652
                                                                                        Procedures: Advanced Topics

                code like the following to pass a variable from two lex levels up from the current proce-
                dure:
                                       mov         bx, [bp+4]                    ;Assume S.L. is at offset 4.
                                       mov         bx, ss:[bx+4]                 ;Traverse two static links
                                       push        ss:[bx-2]                     ;Push variables value.
                                       call        Procedure
                    Passing an intermediate variable by value when you are using a display is somewhat
                easier. You could use code like the following to pass an intermediate variable from lex
                level one:
                                       mov         bx, Display[1*2]              ;Get Display[1] entry.
                                       push        ss:[bx-2]                     ;Push the variable’s value.
                                       call        Procedure



12.2.2     Passing Parameters by Reference, Result, and Value-Result in a Block
           Structured Language

                    The pass by reference, result, and value-result parameter mechanisms generally pass
                the address of parameter on the stack7. If global variables reside in the data segment, acti-
                vation records all exist in the stack segment, and ds≠ss, then you must pass far pointers to
                access all possible variables8.
                    To pass a far pointer you must push a segment value followed by an offset value on
                the stack. For global variables, the segment value is found in the ds register; for non-global
                values, ss contains the segment value. To compute the offset portion of the address you
                would normally use the lea instruction. The following code sequence passes a global vari-
                able by reference:
                                       push        ds                            ;Push segment adrs first.
                                       lea         ax, GlobalVar                 ;Compute offset.
                                       push        ax                            ;Push offset of GlobalVar
                                       call        Procedure
                    Global variables are a special case because the assembler can compute their run-time
                offsets at assembly time. Therefore, for scalar global variables only, we can shorten the code
                sequence above to
                                       push        ds                            ;Push segment adrs.
                                       push        offset GlobalVar              ;Push offset portion.
                                       call        Procedure
                    To pass a local variable by reference you code must first push ss’s value onto the stack
                and then push the local variable’s offset. This offset is the variable’s offset within the stack seg-
                ment, not the offset within the activation record! The following code passes the address of a
                local variable by reference:
                                       push        ss                            ;Push segment address.
                                       lea         ax, [bp-2]                    ;Compute offset of local
                                       push        ax                            ; variable and push it.
                                       call        Procedure
                    To pass an intermediate variable by reference you must first locate the activation
                record containing the variable so you can compute the effective address into the stack seg-
                ment. When using static links, the code to pass the parameter’s address might look like
                the following:




   7. As you may recall, pass by reference, value-result, and result all use the same calling sequence. The differences
   lie in the procedures themselves.
   8. You can use near pointers if ds=ss or if you keep global variables in the main program’s activation record in the
   stack segment.


                                                                                                             Page 653
Chapter 12

                                        push        ss                             ;Push segment portion.
                                        mov         bx, [bp+4]                     ;Assume S.L. is at offset 4.
                                        mov         bx, ss:[bx+4]                  ;Traverse two static links
                                        lea         ax, [bx-2]                     ;Compute effective address
                                        push        ax                             ;Push offset portion.
                                        call        Procedure
                      When using a display, the calling sequence might look like the following:
                                        push        ss                             ;Push segment portion.
                                        mov         bx, Display[1*2]               ;Get Display[1] entry.
                                        lea         ax, [bx-2]                     ;Get the variable’s offset
                                        push        ax                             ; and push it.
                                        call        Procedure
                       As you may recall from the previous chapter, there is a second way to pass a parame-
                  ter by value-result. You can push the value onto the stack and then, when the procedure
                  returns, pop this value off the stack and store it back into the variable from whence it
                  came. This is just a special case of the pass by value mechanism described in the previous
                  section.


12.2.3       Passing Parameters by Name and Lazy-Evaluation in a Block Structured
             Language

                      Since you pass the address of a thunk when passing parameters by name or by
                  lazy-evaluation, the presence of global, intermediate, and local variables does not affect
                  the calling sequence to the procedure. Instead, the thunk has to deal with the differing
                  locations of these variables. The following examples will present thunks for pass by name,
                  you can easily modify these thunks for lazy-evaluation parameters.
                       The biggest problem a thunk has is locating the activation record containing the vari-
                  able whose address it returns. In the last chapter, this wasn’t too much of a problem since
                  variables existed either in the current activation record or in the global data space. In the
                  presence of intermediate variables, this task becomes somewhat more complex. The easi-
                  est solution is to pass two pointers when passing a variable by name. The first pointer
                  should be the address of the thunk, the second pointer should be the offset of the activa-
                  tion record containing the variable the thunk must access9. When the procedure calls the
                  thunk, it must pass this activation record offset as a parameter to the thunk. Consider the
                  following Panacea procedures:
                  TestThunk:procedure(name item:integer; var j:integer);
                  begin TestThunk;
                           for j in 0..9 do item := 0;
                  end TestThunk;
                  CallThunk:procedure;
                  var
                          A: array[0..9] : integer;
                          I: integer;
                  endvar;
                  begin CallThunk;
                           TestThunk(A[I], I);
                  end CallThunk;
                  The assembly code for the above might look like the following:
                  ; TestThunk AR:
                  ;
                  ;      BP+10-         Address of thunk


    9. Actually, you may need to pass several pointers to activation records. For example, if you pass the variable
    “A[i,j,k]” by name and A, i, j, and k are all in different activation records, you will need to pass pointers to each
    activation record. We will ignore this problem here.


Page 654
                                                                            Procedures: Advanced Topics

            ;       BP+8-       Ptr to AR for Item and J parameters (must be in the same AR).
            ;       BP+4-       Far ptr to J.

            TestThunk           proc       near
                                push       bp
                                mov        bp, sp
                                push       ax
                                push       bx
                                push       es

                                les        bx, [bp+4]                  ;Get ptr to J.
                                mov        word ptr es:[bx], 0         ;J := 0;
            ForLoop:            cmp        word ptr es:[bx], 9         ;Is J > 9?
                                ja         ForDone
                                push       [bp+8]                      ;Push AR passed by caller.
                                call       word ptr [bp+10]            ;Call the thunk.
                                mov        word ptr ss:[bx], 0         ;Thunk returns adrs in BX.
                                les        bx, [bp+4]                  ;Get ptr to J.
                                inc        word ptr es:[bx]            ;Add one to it.
                                jmp        ForLoop

            ForDone:            pop        es
                                pop        bx
                                pop        ax
                                pop        bp
                                ret        8
            TestThunk           endp


            CallThunk           proc       near
                                push       bp
                                mov        bp, sp
                                sub        sp, 12          ;Make room for locals.

                                jmp        OverThunk
            Thunk               proc
                                push       bp
                                mov        bp,   sp
                                mov        bp,   [bp+4]    ;Get AR address.
                                mov        ax,   [bp-22]   ;Get I’s value.
                                add        ax,   ax        ;Double, since A is a word array.
                                add        bx,   -20       ;Offset to start of A
                                add        bx,   ax        ;Compute address of A[I] and
                                pop        bp              ; return it in BX.
                                ret        2               ;Remove parameter from stack.
            Thunk               endp

            OverThunk:          push       offset Thunk    ;Push (near) address of thunk
                                push       bp              ;Push ptr to A/I’s AR for thunk
                                push       ss              ;Push address of I onto stack.
                                lea        ax, [bp-22]     ; Offset portion of I.
                                push       ax
                                call       TestThunk
                                mov        sp, bp
                                ret
            CallThunk           endp



12.3   Passing Parameters as Parameters to Another Procedure
                When a procedure passes one of its own parameters as a parameter to another proce-
            dure, certain problems develop that do not exist when passing variables as parameters.
            Indeed, in some (rare) cases it is not logically possible to pass some parameter types to
            some other procedure. This section deals with the problems of passing one procedure’s
            parameters to another procedure.
                Pass by value parameters are essentially no different than local variables. All the tech-
            niques in the previous sections apply to pass by value parameters. The following sections

                                                                                                Page 655
Chapter 12

                  deal with the cases where the calling procedure is passing a parameter passed to it by ref-
                  erence, value-result, result, name, and lazy evaluation.


12.3.1       Passing Reference Parameters to Other Procedures

                      Passing a reference parameter though to another procedure is where the complexity
                  begins. Consider the following (pseudo) Pascal procedure skeleton:
                  procedure HasRef(var refparm:integer);
                           procedure ToProc(???? parm:integer);
                           begin
                               .
                               .
                               .
                           end;
                  begin {HasRef}
                              .
                              .
                              .
                           ToProc(refParm);
                              .
                              .
                              .
                  end;
                  The “????” in the ToProc parameter list indicates that we will fill in the appropriate param-
                  eter passing mechanism as the discussion warrants.
                      If ToProc expects a pass by value parameter (i.e., ???? is just an empty string), then Has-
                  Ref needs to fetch the value of the refparm parameter and pass this value to ToProc. The fol-
                  lowing code accomplishes this10:
                                        les          bx, [bp+4]       ;Fetch address of refparm
                                        push         es:[bx]          ;Push integer pointed at by refparm
                                        call         ToProc
                       To pass a reference parameter by reference, value-result, or result parameter is easy –
                  just copy the caller’s parameter as-is onto the stack. That is, if the parm parameter in ToProc
                  above is a reference parameter, a value-result parameter, or a result parameter, you would
                  use the following calling sequence:
                                        push         [bp+6]           ;Push segment portion of ref parm.
                                        push         [bp+4]           ;Push offset portion of ref parm.
                                        call         ToProc
                      To pass a reference parameter by name is fairly easy. Just write a thunk that grabs the
                  reference parameter’s address and returns this value. In the example above, the call to
                  ToProc might look like the following:
                                        jmp          SkipThunk
                  Thunk0                proc         near
                                        les          bx, [bp+4]       ;Assume BP points at HasRef’s AR.
                                        ret
                  Thunk0                endp

                  SkipThunk:            push         offset Thunk0                  ;Address of thunk.
                                        push         bp                             ;AR containing thunk’s vars.
                                        call         ToProc
                  Inside ToProc, a reference to the parameter might look like the following:
                                        push         bp                             ;Save our AR ptr.
                                        mov          bp, [bp+4]                     ;Ptr to Parm’s AR.
                                        call         near ptr [bp+6]                ;Call the thunk.
                                        pop          bp                             ;Retrieve our AR ptr.
                                        mov          ax, es:[bx]                    ;Access variable.
                                          .
                                          .
                                          .


    10. The examples in this section all assume the use of a display. If you are using static links, be sure to adjust all
    the offsets and the code to allow for the static link that the caller must push immediately before a call.


Page 656
                                                                            Procedures: Advanced Topics

            To pass a reference parameter by lazy evaluation is very similar to passing it by name. The
            only difference (in ToProc’s calling sequence) is that the thunk must return the value of the
            variable rather than its address. You can easily accomplish this with the following thunk:
            Thunk1              proc       near
                                push       es
                                push       bx
                                les        bx, [bp+4]     ;Assume BP points at HasRef’s AR.
                                mov        ax, es:[bx]    ;Return value of ref parm in ax.
                                pop        bx
                                pop        es
                                ret
            Thunk1              endp



12.3.2   Passing Value-Result and Result Parameters as Parameters

                Assuming you’ve created a local variable that holds the value of a value-result or
            result parameter, passing one of these parameters to another procedure is no different
            than passing value parameters to other code. Once a procedure makes a local copy of the
            value-result parameter or allocates storage for a result parameter, you can treat that vari-
            able just like a value parameter or a local variable with respect to passing it on to other
            procedures.
                Of course, it doesn’t make sense to use the value of a result parameter until you’ve
            stored a value into that parameter’s local storage. Therefore, take care when passing result
            parameters to other procedures that you’ve initialized a result parameter before using its
            value.


12.3.3   Passing Name Parameters to Other Procedures

                Since a pass by name parameter’s thunk returns the address of a parameter, passing a
            name parameter to another procedure is very similar to passing a reference parameter to
            another procedure. The primary differences occur when passing the parameter on as a
            name parameter.
                 When passing a name parameter as a value parameter, you first call the thunk, deref-
            erence the address the thunk returns, and then pass the value to the new procedure. The
            following code demonstrates such a call when the thunk returns the variable’s address in
            es:bx (assume pass by name parameter’s AR pointer is at address bp+4 and the pointer to
            the thunk is at address bp+6):
                                push       bp                          ;Save our AR ptr.
                                mov        bp, [bp+4]                  ;Ptr to Parm’s AR.
                                call       near ptr [bp+6]             ;Call the thunk.
                                push       word ptr es:[bx]            ;Push parameter’s value.
                                pop        bp                          ;Retrieve our AR ptr.
                                call       ToProc                      ;Call the procedure.
                                 .
                                 .
                                 .

                Passing a name parameter to another procedure by reference is very easy. All you
            have to do is push the address the thunk returns onto the stack. The following code, that is
            very similar to the code above, accomplishes this:
                                push       bp                          ;Save our AR ptr.
                                mov        bp, [bp+4]                  ;Ptr to Parm’s AR.
                                call       near ptr [bp+6]             ;Call the thunk.
                                pop        bp                          ;Retrieve our AR ptr.
                                push       es                          ;Push seg portion of adrs.
                                push       bx                          ;Push offset portion of adrs.
                                call       ToProc                      ;Call the procedure.
                                 .
                                 .
                                 .



                                                                                                Page 657
 Chapter 12

                       Passing a name parameter to another procedure as a pass by name parameter is very
                   easy; all you need to do is pass the thunk (and associated pointers) on to the new proce-
                   dure. The following code accomplishes this:
                                         push         [bp+6]                          ;Pass Thunk’s address.
                                         push         [bp+4]                          ;Pass adrs of Thunk’s AR.
                                         call         ToProc

                       To pass a name parameter to another procedure by lazy evaluation, you need to create
                   a thunk for the lazy-evaluation parameter that calls the pass by name parameter’s thunk,
                   dereferences the pointer, and then returns this value. The implementation is left as a pro-
                   gramming project.


 12.3.4        Passing Lazy Evaluation Parameters as Parameters

                        Lazy evaluation parameters typically consist of three components: the address of a
                   thunk, a location to hold the value the thunk returns, and a boolean variable that deter-
                   mines whether the procedure must call the thunk to get the parameter’s value or if it can
                   simply use the value previously returned by the thunk (see the exercises in the previous
                   chapter to see how to implement lazy evaluation parameters). When passing a parameter
                   by lazy evaluation to another procedure, the calling code must first check the boolean
                   variable to see if the value field is valid. If not, the code must first call the thunk to get this
                   value. If the boolean field is true, the calling code can simply use the data in the value
                   field. In either case, once the value field has data, passing this data on to another proce-
                   dure is no different than passing a local variable or a value parameter to another proce-
                   dure.


 12.3.5        Parameter Passing Summary


                 Table 48: Passing Parameters as Parameters to Another Procedure
                                      Pass as           Pass as                                                 Pass as Lazy
                 Pass as Value                                           Pass as Result     Pass as Name
                                     Reference        Value-Result                                               Evaluation
Value            Pass the value    Pass address of    Pass address of    Pass address of    Create a thunk     Create a thunk
                                   the value          the value          the value          that returns the   that returns the
                                   parameter          parameter          parameter          address of the     value
                                                                                            value parameter
Reference        Dereference       Pass the address   Pass the address   Pass the address   Create a thunk     Create a thunk
                 parameter and     (value of the      (value of the      (value of the      that passes the    that deferences
                 pass the value    reference          reference          reference          address (value     the reference
                 it points at      parameter)         parameter)         parameter)         of the reference   parameter and
                                                                                            parameter)         returns its value
Value-Result     Pass the local    Pass the address   Pass the address   Pass the address   Create a thunk     Create a thunk
                 value as the      of the local       of the local       of the local       that returns the   that returns the
                 value parameter   value as the       value as the       value as the       address of the     value in the
                                   parameter          parameter          parameter          local value of     local value of
                                                                                            the value-result   the value-result
                                                                                            parameter          parameter
Result           Pass the local    Pass the address   Pass the address   Pass the address   Create a thunk     Create a thunk
                 value as the      of the local       of the local       of the local       that returns the   that returns the
                 value parameter   value as the       value as the       value as the       address of the     value in the
                                   parameter          parameter          parameter          local value of     local value of
                                                                                            the result         the result
                                                                                            parameter          parameter



 Page 658
                                                                                                 Procedures: Advanced Topics

                 Table 48: Passing Parameters as Parameters to Another Procedure
                                        Pass as             Pass as                                                   Pass as Lazy
                 Pass as Value                                               Pass as Result      Pass as Name
                                       Reference          Value-Result                                                 Evaluation
Name             Call the thunk,     Call the thunk      Call the thunk      Call the thunk      Pass the address    Write a thunk
                 dereference the     and pass the        and pass the        and pass the        of the thunk and    that calls the
                 pointer, and        address it          address it          address it          any other values    name parame-
                 pass the value at   returns as the      returns as the      returns as the      associated with     ter’s thunk,
                 the address the     parameter           parameter           parameter           the name            dereferences the
                 thunk returns                                                                   parameter           address it
                                                                                                                     returns, and
                                                                                                                     then returns the
                                                                                                                     value at that
                                                                                                                     address
Lazy             If necessary,       If necessary,       If necessary,       If necessary,       If necessary,       Create a thunk
Evaluation       call the thunk to   call the thunk to   call the thunk to   call the thunk to   call the thunk to   that checks the
                 obtain the Lazy     obtain the Lazy     obtain the Lazy     obtain the Lazy     obtain the Lazy     boolean field of
                 Eval parame-        Eval parame-        Eval parame-        Eval parame-        Eval parame-        the caller’s
                 ter’s value.        ter’s value.        ter’s value.        ter’s value.        ter’s value.        Lazy Eval
                 Pass the local      Pass the address    Pass the address    Pass the address    Create a thunk      parameter. It
                 value as the        of the local        of the local        of the local        that returns the    should call the
                 value parameter     value as the        value as the        value as the        address of the      corresponding
                                     parameter           parameter           parameter           Lazy Eval’s         thunk if this
                                                                                                 value field         variable is false.
                                                                                                                     It should set the
                                                                                                                     boolean field to
                                                                                                                     true and then
                                                                                                                     return the data
                                                                                                                     in the value
                                                                                                                     field



 12.4        Passing Procedures as Parameters
                        Many programming languages let you pass a procedure or function name as a param-
                   eter. This lets the caller pass along various actions to perform inside a procedure. The clas-
                   sic example is a plot procedure that graphs some generic math function passed as a
                   parameter to plot.
                        Standard Pascal lets you pass procedures and functions by declaring them as follows:
                   procedure DoCall(procedure x);
                   begin
                              x;
                   end;
                   The statement DoCall(xyz); calls DoCall that, in turn, calls procedure xyz.
                       Passing a procedure or function as a parameter may seem like an easy task – just pass
                   the address of the function or procedure as the following example demonstrates:
                   procedure PassMe;
                   begin
                          Writeln('PassMe was called');
                   end;
                   procedure CallPassMe(procedure x);
                   begin
                          x;
                   end;
                   begin {main}
                          CallPassMe(PassMe);
                   end.



                                                                                                                         Page 659
Chapter 12

                 The 80x86 code to implement the above could look like the following:
             PassMe              proc       near
                                 print
                                 byte       "PassMe was called",cr,lf,0
                                 ret
             PassMe              endp
             CallPassMe          proc       near
                                 push       bp
                                 mov        bp, sp
                                 call       word ptr [bp+4]
                                 pop        bp
                                 ret        2
             CallPassMe          endp
             Main                proc       near
                                 lea        bx, PassMe     ;Pass address of PassMe to
                                 push       bx             ; CallPassMe
                                 call       CallPassMe
                                 ExitPgm
             Main                endp
                 For an example as simple as the one above, this technique works fine. However, it
             does not always work properly if PassMe needs to access non-local variables. The follow-
             ing Pascal code demonstrates the problem that could occur:
             program main;
                      procedure dummy;
                      begin end;
                      procedure Recurse1(i:integer; procedure x);
                                 procedure Print;
                                 begin
                                            writeln(i);
                                 end;
                                 procedure Recurse2(j:integer; procedure y);
                                 begin
                                            if (j=1) then y
                                            else if (j=5) then Recurse1(j-1, Print)
                                            else Recurse1(j-1, y);
                                 end;
                      begin {Recurse1}
                                 Recurse2(i, x);
                      end;
             begin {Main}
                      Recurse1(5,dummy);
             end.
             This code produces the following call sequence:
             Recurse1(5,dummy) → Recurse2(5,dummy) → Recurse1(4,Print) →
             Recurse2(4,Print) → Recurse1(3,Print) → Recurse2(3,Print) →
             Recurse1(2,Print) → Recurse2(2,Print) → Recurse1(1,Print) →
             Recurse2(1,Print) → Print
             Print will print the value of Recurse1’s i variable to the standard output. However, there are
             several activation records present on the stack that raises the obvious question, “which
             copy of i does Print display?” Without giving it much thought, you might conclude that it
             should print the value “1” since Recurse2 calls Print when Recurse1’s value for i is one.
             Note, though, that when Recurse2 passes the address of Print to Recurse1, i’s value is four.
             Pascal, like most block structured languages, will use the value of i at the point Recurse2



Page 660
                                                                Procedures: Advanced Topics

passes the address of Print to Recurse1. Hence, the code above should print the value four,
not the value one.
     This creates a difficult implementation problem. After all, Print cannot simply access
the display to gain access to the global variable i – the display’s entry for Recurse1 points
at the latest copy of Recurse1’s activation record, not the entry containing the value four
which is what you want.
     The most common solution in systems using a display is to make a local copy of each
display whenever calling a procedure or function. When passing a procedure or function
as a parameter, the calling code copies the display along with the address of the procedure
or function. This is why Intel’s enter instruction makes a copy of the display when build-
ing the activation record.
    If you are passing procedures and functions as parameters, you may want to consider
using static links rather than a display. When using a static link you need only pass a sin-
gle pointer (the static link) along with the routine’s address. Of course, it is more work to
access non-local variables, but you don’t have to copy the display on every call, which is
quite expensive.
    The following 80x86 code provides the implementation of the above code using static
links:
wp                  textequ    <word ptr>
Dummy               proc       near
                    ret
Dummy               endp
; PrintIt; (Use the name PrintIt to avoid conflict).
;
;      stack:
;
;      bp+4:     static link.
PrintIt             proc       near
                    push       bp
                    mov        bp, sp
                    mov        bx, [bp+4]                  ;Get static link
                    mov        ax, ss:[bx-10]              ;Get i’s value.
                    puti
                    pop        bp
                    ret        2
PrintIt             endp
; Recurse1(i:integer; procedure x);
;
;      stack:
;
;      bp+10:    i
;      bp+8:     x’s static link
;      bp+6: x’s address
Recurse1            proc       near
                    push       bp
                    mov        bp, sp
                    push       wp [bp+10]                  ;Push   value of i onto stack.
                    push       wp [bp+8]                   ;Push   x’s static link.
                    push       wp [bp+6]                   ;Push   x’s address.
                    push       bp                          ;Push   Recurse1’s static link.
                    call       Recurse1
                    pop        bp
                    ret        6
Recurse1            endp
; Recurse2(i:integer; procedure y);
;
;      stack:
;
;      bp+10: j
;      bp+8: y’s static link.


                                                                                    Page 661
Chapter 12

             ;         bp+6:   y’s address.
             ;         bp+4:   Recurse2’s static link.
             Recurse2             proc       near
                                  push       bp
                                  mov        bp, sp
                                  cmp        wp [bp+10], 1                ;Is j=1?
                                  jne        TryJeq5
                                  push       [bp+8]                       ;y’s static link.
                                  call       wp [bp+6]                    ;Call y.
                                  jmp        R2Done
             TryJeq5:             cmp        wp [bp+10], 5                ;Is j=5?
                                  jne        Call1
                                  mov        ax, [bp+10]
                                  dec        ax
                                  push       ax
                                  push       [bp+4]                       ;Push static link to R1.
                                  lea        ax, PrintIt                  ;Push address of print.
                                  push       ax
                                  call       Recurse1
                                  jmp        R2Done
             Call1:               mov        ax, [bp+10]
                                  dec        ax
                                  push       ax
                                  push       [bp+8]                       ;Pass along existing
                                  push       [bp+6]                       ; address and link.
                                  call       Recurse1
             R2Done:              pop        bp
                                  ret        6
             Recurse1             endp
             main                 proc
                                  push       bp
                                  mov        bp, sp
                                  mov        ax, 5                        ;Push first parameter.
                                  push       ax
                                  push       bp                           ;Dummy static link.
                                  lea        ax, Dummy                    ;Push address of dummy.
                                  push       ax
                                  call       Recurse1
                                  pop        bp
                                  ExitPgm
             main                 endp
                 There are several ways to improve this code. Of course, this particular program
             doesn’t really need to maintain a display or static list because only PrintIt accesses
             non-local variables; however, ignore that fact for the time being and pretend it does. Since
             you know that PrintIt only accesses variables at one particular lex level, and the program
             only calls PrintIt indirectly, you can pass a pointer to the appropriate activation record; this
             is what the above code does, although it maintains full static links as well. Compilers
             must always assume the worst case and often generate inefficient code. If you study your
             particular needs, however, you may be able to improve the efficiency of your code by
             avoiding much of the overhead of maintaining static lists or copying displays.
                  Keep in mind that thunks are special cases of functions that you call indirectly.
             They suffer from the same problems and drawbacks as procedure and function parame-
             ters with respect to accessing non-local variables. If such routines access non-local vari-
             ables (and thunks almost always will) then you must exercise care when calling such
             routines. Fortunately, thunks never cause indirect recursion (which is responsible for the
             crazy problems in the Recurse1 / Recurse2 example) so you can use the display to access
             any non-local variables appearing within the thunk.




Page 662
                                                                                     Procedures: Advanced Topics


12.5   Iterators
                    An iterator is a cross between a control structure and a function. Although common
                high level languages do not often support iterators, they are present in some very high
                level languages11. Iterators provide a combination state machine/function call mechanism
                that lets a function pick up where it last left off on each new call. Iterators are also part of a
                loop control structure, with the iterator providing the value of the loop control variable on
                each iteration.
                    To understand what an iterator is, consider the following for loop from Pascal:
                                       for I := 1 to 10 do <some statement>;
                When learning Pascal you were probably taught that this statement initializes i with one,
                compares i with 10, and executes the statement if i is less than or equal to 10. After execut-
                ing the statement, the for statement increments i and compares it with 10 again, repeating
                the process over and over again until I is greater than 10.
                     While this description is semantically correct, and indeed, it’s the way that most Pas-
                cal compilers implement the for loop, this is not the only point of view that describes how
                the for loop operates. Suppose, instead, that you were to treat the “to” reserved word as an
                operator. An operator that expects two parameters (one and ten in this case) and returns
                the range of values on each successive execution. That is, on the first call the “to” operator
                would return one, on the second call it would return two, etc. After the tenth call, the “to”
                operator would fail which would terminate the loop. This is exactly the description of an
                iterator.
                    In general, an iterator controls a loop. Different languages use different names for iter-
                ator controlled loops, this text will just use the name foreach as follows:
                         foreach variable in iterator() do
                                   statements;
                         endfor;

                     Variable is a variable whose type is compatible with the return type of the iterator. An
                iterator returns two values: a boolean success or failure value and a function result. As
                long as the iterator returns success, the foreach statement assigns the other return value to
                variable and executes statements. If iterator returns failure, the foreach loop terminates and
                executes the next sequential statement following the foreach loop’s body. In the case of fail-
                ure, the foreach statement does not affect the value of variable.
                     Iterators are considerably more complex than normal functions. A typical function
                call involves two basic operations: a call and a return. Iterator invocations involve four
                basic operations:
                                  1)       Initial iterator call
                                  2)       Yielding a value
                                  3)       Resumption of an iterator
                                  4)       Termination of an iterator.
                    To understand how an iterator operates, consider the following short example from
                the Panacea programming language12:
                Range:iterator(start,stop:integer):integer;
                begin range;
                         while (start <= stop) do
                                       yield start;
                                       start := start + 1;
                         endwhile;


   11. Ada and PL/I support very limited forms of iterators, though they do not support the type of iterators found
   in CLU, SETL, Icon, and other languages.
   12. Panacea is a very high level language developed by Randall Hyde for use in compiler courses at UC Riverside.


                                                                                                         Page 663
Chapter 12

                end Range;
                In the Panacea programming language, iterator calls may only appear in the foreach state-
                ment. With the exception of the yield statement above, anyone familiar with Pascal or C++
                should be able to figure out the basic logic of this iterator.
                    An iterator in the Panacea programming language may return to its caller using one
                of two separate mechanisms, it can return to the caller, by exiting through the end
                Range; statement or it may yield a value by executing the yield statement. An iterator
                succeeds if it executes the yield statement, it fails if it simply returns to the caller. Therefore,
                the foreach statement will only execute its corresponding statement if you exit an iterator
                with a yield. The foreach statement terminates if you simply return from the iterator. In the
                example above, the iterator returns the values start..stop via a yield and then the iterator ter-
                minates. The loop
                                     foreach i in Range(1,10) do
                                              write(i);
                                     endfor;

                is comparable to the Pascal statement:
                                     for i := 1 to 10 do write(i);
                    When a Panacea program first executes the foreach statement, it makes an initial call to
                the iterator. The iterator runs until it executes a yield or it returns. If it executes the yield
                statement, it returns the value of the expression following the yield as the iterator result
                and it returns success. If it simply returns, the iterator returns failure and no iterator
                result. In the current example, the initial call to the iterator returns success and the value
                one.
                     Assuming a successful return (as in the current example), the foreach statement
                assigns the iterator return value to the loop control variable and executes the foreach loop
                body. After executing the loop body, the foreach statement calls the iterator again. How-
                ever, this time the foreach statement resumes the iterator rather than making an initial call.
                An iterator resumption continues with the first statement following the last yield it executed. In
                the range example, a resumption would continue execution at the start := start + 1; state-
                ment. On the first resumption, the Range iterator would add one to start, producing the
                value two. Two is less than ten (stop’s value) so the while loop would repeat and the itera-
                tor would yield the value two. This process would repeat over and over again until the
                iterator yields ten. Upon resuming after yielding ten, the iterator would increment start to
                eleven and then return, rather than yield, since this new value is not less than or equal to
                ten. When the range iterator returns (fails), the foreach loop terminates.


12.5.1       Implementing Iterators Using In-Line Expansion

                    The implementation of an iterator is rather complex. To begin with, consider a first
                attempt at an assembly implementation of the foreach statement above:
                                     push        1                             ;Assume 286 or better
                                     push        10                            ; and parms passed on stack.
                                     call        Range_Initial                 ;Make initial call to iter.
                                     jc          Failure                       ;C=0, 1 means success, fail.
                ForLoop:             puti                                      ;Assume result is in AX.
                                     call        Range_Resume                  ;Resume iterator.
                                     jnc         ForLoop                       ;Carry clear is success!
                Failure:

                     Although this looks like a straight-forward implementation project, there are several
                issues to consider. First, the call to Range_Resume above looks simple enough, but there is
                no fixed address that corresponds to the resume address. While it is certainly true that this
                Range example has only one resume address, in general you can have as many yield state-
                ments as you like in an iterator. For example, the following iterator returns the values 1, 2,
                3, and 4:

Page 664
                                                                                  Procedures: Advanced Topics

                      OneToFour:iterator:integer;
                      begin OneToFour;
                                  yield   1;
                                  yield   2;
                                  yield   3;
                                  yield   4;
                      end OneToFour;
             The initial call would execute the yield 1; statement. The first resumption would execute
             the yield 2; statement, the second resumption would execute yield 3;, etc. Obviously there
             is no single resume address the calling code can count on.
                  There are a couple of additional details left to consider. First, an iterator is free to call
             procedures and functions13. If such a procedure or function executes the yield statement
             then resumption by the foreach statement continues execution within the procedure or
             function that executed the yield. Second, the semantics of an iterator require all local vari-
             ables and parameters to maintain their values until the iterator terminates. That is, yield-
             ing does not deallocate local variables and parameters. Likewise, any return addresses left
             on the stack (e.g., the call to a procedure or function that executes the yield statement) must
             not be lost when a piece of code yields and the corresponding foreach statement resumes
             the iterator. In general, this means you cannot use the standard call and return sequence to
             yield from or resume to an iterator because you have to preserve the contents of the stack.
                  While there are several ways to implement iterators in assembly language, perhaps
             the most practical method is to have the iterator call the loop controlled by the iterator and
             have the loop return back to the iterator function. Of course, this is counter-intuitive. Nor-
             mally, one thinks of the iterator as the function that the loop calls on each iteration, not the
             other way around. However, given the structure of the stack during the execution of an
             iterator, the counter-intuitive approach turns out to be easier to implement.
                 Some high level languages support iterators in exactly this fashion. For example,
             Metaware’s Professional Pascal Compiler for the PC supports iterators14. Were you to cre-
             ate a code sequence as follows:
                      iterator OneToFour:integer;
                      begin
                                yield 1;
                                yield 2;
                                yield 3;
                                yield 4;
                      end;
             and call it in the main program as follows:
                      for i in OneToFour do writeln(i);
             Professional Pascal would completely rearrange your code. Instead of turning the iterator
             into an assembly language function and call this function from within the for loop body,
             this code would turn the for loop body into a function, expand the iterator in-line (much
             like a macro) and call the for loop body function on each yield. That is, Professional Pascal
             would probably produce assembly language that looks something like the following:




13. In Panacea an iterator could also call other types of program units, including other iterators, but you can
ignore this for now.
14. Obviously, this is a non-standard extension to the Pascal programming language provided in Professional Pas-
cal.


                                                                                                      Page 665
Chapter 12

                ; The following procedure corresponds to the for loop body
                ; with a single parameter (I) corresponding to the loop
                ; control variable:
                ForLoopCode           proc          near
                                      push          bp
                                      mov           bp, sp
                                      mov           ax, [bp+4]        ;Get loop control value and
                                      puti                            ; print it.
                                      putcr
                                      pop           bp
                                      ret           2                 ;Pop loop control value off stk.
                ForLoopCode           endp
                ;   The follow code would be emitted in-line upon encountering the
                ;   for loop in the main program, it corresponds to an in-line
                ;   expansion of the iterator as though it were a macro,
                ;   substituting a call for the yield instructions:
                                      push          1                 ;On 286 and later processors only.
                                      call          ForLoopCode
                                      push          2
                                      call          ForLoopCode
                                      push          3
                                      call          ForLoopCode
                                      push          4
                                      call          ForLoopCode
                    This method for implementing iterators is convenient and produces relatively effi-
                cient (fast) code. It does, however, suffer from a couple drawbacks. First, since you must
                expand the iterator in-line wherever you call it, much like a macro, your program could
                grow large if the iterator is not short and you use it often. Second, this method of imple-
                menting the iterator completely hides the underlying logic of the code and makes your
                assembly language programs difficult to read and understand.


12.5.2       Implementing Iterators with Resume Frames

                    In-line expansion is not the only way to implement iterators. There is another method
                that preserves the structure of your program at the expense of a slightly more complex
                implementation. Several high level languages, including Icon and CLU, use this imple-
                mentation.
                    To start with, you will need another stack frame: the resume frame. A resume frame
                contains two entries: a yield return address (that is, the address of the next instruction
                after the yield statement) and a dynamic link, which is a pointer to the iterator’s activation
                record. Typically the dynamic link is just the value in the bp register at the time you exe-
                cute the yield instruction. This version implements the four parts of an iterator as follows:
                                 1)          A call instruction for the initial iterator call,
                                 2)          A call instruction for the yield statement,
                                 3)          A ret instruction for the resume operation, and
                                 4)          A ret instruction to terminate the iterator.
                    To begin with, an iterator will require two return addresses rather than the single
                return address you would normally expect. The first return address appearing on the
                stack is the termination return address. The second return address is where the subroutine
                transfers control on a yield operation. The calling code must push these two return
                addresses upon initial invocation of the iterator. The stack, upon initial entry into the iter-
                ator, should look something like Figure 12.8.
                   As an example, consider the Range iterator presented earlier. This iterator requires
                two parameters, a starting value and an ending value:
                         foreach i in Range(1,10) do writeln(i);




Page 666
                                                                                 Procedures: Advanced Topics




                                 Previous Stack Contents
                                                                 If this is a
                                   Parameters for Iterator       NEAR Iterator

                                Termination Return Address

                                   Yield Return Address
                                                                        SP


Figure 12.8 Iterator Activation Record

                  The code to make the initial call to the Range iterator, producing a stack like the one
               above, could be the following:
                                   push       1                           ;Push start parameter value.
                                   push       10                          ;Push stop parameter value.
                                   push       offset ForDone              ;Push termination address.
                                   call       Range                       ;Pushes yield return address.
               ForDone is the first statement immediately following the foreach loop, that is, the instruc-
               tion to execute when the iterator returns failure. The foreach loop body must begin with
               the first instruction following the call to Range. At the end of the foreach loop, rather than
               jumping back to the start of the loop, or calling the iterator again, this code should just
               execute a ret instruction. The reason will become clear in a moment. So the implementa-
               tion of the above foreach statement could be the following:
                                   push       1                           ;Obviously, this requires a
                                   push       10                          ; 80286 or later processor.
                                   push       offset ForDone
                                   call       Range
                                   mov        bp, [bp]                    ;Explained a little later.
                                   puti
                                   putcr
                                   ret
               ForDone:
               Granted, this doesn’t look anything at all like a loop. However, by playing some major
               tricks with the stack, you’ll see that this code really does iterate the loop body (puti and
               putcr) as intended.
                   Now consider the Range iterator itself, here’s the code to do the job:
               Range_Start         equ        word ptr <[bp+8]>              ;Address of Start parameter.
               Range_Stop          equ        word ptr <[bp+6]>              ;Address of Stop parameter.
               Range_Yield         equ        word ptr <[bp+2]>              ;Yield return address.
               Range               proc       near
                                   push       bp
                                   mov        bp, sp
               RangeLoop:          mov        ax, Range_Start             ;Get start parameter and
                                   cmp        ax, Range_Stop              ; compare against stop.
                                   ja         RangeDone                   ;Terminate if start > stop
               ; Okay, build the resume frame:
                                   push       bp                          ;Save dynamic link.
                                   call       Range_Yield                 ;Do YIELD operation.
                                   pop        bp                          ;Restore dynamic link.
                                   inc        Range_Start                 ;Bump up start value
                                   jmp        RangeLoop                   ;Repeat until start > stop.

               RangeDone:          pop        bp                          ;Restore old BP
                                   add        sp, 2                       ;Pop YIELD return address
                                   ret        4                           ;Terminate iterator.
               Range               endp

                                                                                                    Page 667
Chapter 12




                         10      Previous Stack Contents           If this is a
                                                                   NEAR Iterator
                          8     Value of Start Parameter (1)


                          6   Value of Stop Parameter (10)

                          4    Termination Return Address

                          2        Yield Return Address

                          0         Original BP Value
                                                                        SP, BP


                                        Offset from BP


 Figure 12.9 Range Activation Record

                   Although this routine is rather short, don’t let its size deceive you; it’s quite complex.
               The best way to describe how this iterator operates is to take it a few instructions at a time.
               The first two instructions are the standard entry sequence for a procedure. Upon execu-
               tion of these two instructions, the stack looks like that in Figure 12.9.
                   The next three statements in the Range iterator, at label RangeLoop, implement the ter-
               mination test of the while loop. When the Start parameter contains a value greater than the
               Stop parameter, control transfers to the RangeDone label at which point the code pops the
               value of bp off the stack, pops the yield return address off the stack (since this code will
               not return back to the body of the iterator loop) and then returns via the termination
               return address that is immediately above the yield return address on the stack. The return
               instruction also pops the two parameters off the stack.
                   The real work of the iterator occurs in the body of the while loop. The push, call, and
               pop instructions implement the yield statement. The push and call instructions build the
               resume frame and then return control to the body of the foreach loop. The call instruction
               is not calling a subroutine. What it is really doing here is finishing off the resume frame
               (by storing the yield resume address into the resume frame) and then it returns control
               back to the body of the foreach loop by jumping indirect through the yield return address
               pushed on the stack by the initial call to the iterator. After the execution of this call, the
               stack frame looks like that in Figure 12.9.
               Also note that the ax register contains the return value for the iterator. As with functions,
               ax is a good place to return the iterator return result.
                    Immediately after yielding back to the foreach loop, the code must reload bp with the
               original value prior to the iterator invocation. This allows the calling code to correctly
               access parameters and local variables in its own activation record rather than the activa-
               tion record of the iterator. Since bp just happens to point at the original bp value for the
               calling code, executing the mov bp, [bp] instruction reloads bp as appropriate. Of course,
               in this example reloading bp isn’t necessary because the body of the foreach loop does not
               reference any memory locations off the bp register, but in general you will need to restore
               bp.
                   At the end of the foreach loop body the ret instruction resumes the iterator. The ret
               instruction pops the return address off the stack which returns control back to the iterator
               immediately after the call. The instruction at this point pops bp off the stack, increments
               the Start variable, and then repeats the while loop.


Page 668
                                                                                 Procedures: Advanced Topics




                                Previous Stack Contents

                               Value of Start Parameter (1)

                              Value of Stop Parameter (10)
                                                                 Iterator
                               Termination Return Address        Activation
                                                                 Record
                                  Yield Return Address

                                   Original BP Value
                                                                         BP
                                Dynamic Link (old BP)
                                                                Resume Frame
                                Resume Return Address
                                                                         SP




Figure 12.10 Range Resume Record

                  Of course, this is a lot of work to create a piece of code that simply repeats a loop ten
              times. A simple for loop would have been much easier and quite a bit more efficient that
              the foreach implementation described in this section. This section used the Range iterator
              because it was easy to show how iterators work using Range, not because actually imple-
              menting Range as an iterator is a good idea.



12.6     Sample Programs
                   The sample programs in this chapter provide two examples of iterators. The first
              example is a simple iterator that processes characters in a string and returns the vowels
              found in that string. The second iterator is a synthetic program (i.e., written just to demon-
              strate iterators) that is considerably more complex since it deals with static links. The sec-
              ond sample program also demonstrates another way to build the resume frame for an
              iterator. Take a good look at the macros that this program uses. They can simplify the user
              of iterators in your programs.


12.6.1     An Example of an Iterator

                   The following example demonstrates a simple iterator. This piece of code reads a
              string from the user and then locates all the vowels (a, e, i, o, u, w, y) on the line and prints
              their index into the string, the vowel at that position, and counts the occurrences of each
              vowel. This isn’t a particularly good example of an iterator, however it does serve to dem-
              onstrate an implementation and use.
                    First, a pseudo-Pascal version of the program:
              program DoVowels(input,output);
              const
                     Vowels = [‘a’, ‘e’, ‘i’, ‘o’, ‘u’, ‘y’, ‘w’,
                                   ‘A’, ‘E’, ‘I’, ‘O’, ‘U’, ‘Y’, ‘W’];
              var


                                                                                                     Page 669
Chapter 12

                    ThisVowel : integer;
                    VowelCnt : array [char] of integer;
                    iterator GetVowel(s:string) : integer;
                    var
                              CurIndex : integer;
                    begin
                                for CurIndex := 1 to length(s) do
                                         if (s [CurIndex] in Vowels) then begin
                                                 { If we have a vowel, bump the cnt by 1 }
                                                 Vowels[s[CurIndex]] := Vowels[s[CurIndex]]+1;
                                                 ( Return index into string of current vowel }
                                                 yield CurIndex;
                                             end;
                    end;
             begin {main}
                    { First, initialize our vowel counters }
                    VowelCnt   [‘a’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘e’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘i’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘o’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘u’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘w’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘y’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘A’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘E’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘I’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘O’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘U’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘W’]   :=   0;
                    VowelCnt   [‘Y’]   :=   0;
                    { Read and process the input string}
                    Write(‘Enter a string: ‘);
                    ReadLn(InputStr);
                    foreach ThisVowel in GetVowel(InputStr) do
                              WriteLn(‘Vowel ‘,InputStr [ThisVowel],
                                          ‘ at position ‘, ThisVowel);
                    { Output the vowel counts }
                    WriteLn(‘#   of   A’’s:’,VowelCnt[‘a’]   +   VowelCnt[‘A’]);
                    WriteLn(‘#   of   E’’s:’,VowelCnt[‘e’]   +   VowelCnt[‘E’]);
                    WriteLn(‘#   of   I’’s:’,VowelCnt[‘i’]   +   VowelCnt[‘I’]);
                    WriteLn(‘#   of   O’’s:’,VowelCnt[‘o’]   +   VowelCnt[‘O’]);
                    WriteLn(‘#   of   U’’s:’,VowelCnt[‘u’]   +   VowelCnt[‘U’]);
                    WriteLn(‘#   of   W’’s:’,VowelCnt[‘w’]   +   VowelCnt[‘W’]);
                    WriteLn(‘#   of   Y’’s:’,VowelCnt[‘y’]   +   VowelCnt[‘Y’]);
             end.

             Here’s the working assembly language version:
                                .286       ;For PUSH imm instr.
                                .xlist
                                include stdlib.a
                                includelib stdlib.lib
                                .list
             ; Some “cute” equates:
             Iterator           textequ      <proc>
             endi               textequ      <endp>
             wp                 textequ      <word ptr>
             ; Necessary global variables:
             dseg               segment      para public ‘data’



Page 670
                                                           Procedures: Advanced Topics

; As per UCR StdLib instructions, InputStr must hold
; at least 128 characters.
InputStr           byte      128 dup (?)
; Note that the following statement initializes the
; VowelCnt array to zeros, saving us from having to
; do this in the main program.
VowelCnt           word      256 dup (0)
dseg               ends
cseg               segment   para public ‘code’
                   assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg
; GetVowel-        This iterator searches for the next vowel in the
;                  input string and returns the index to the value
;                  as the iterator result. On entry, ES:DI points
;                  at the string to process. On yield, AX returns
;                  the zero-based index into the string of the
;                  current vowel.
;
; GVYield-         Address to call when performing the yield.
; GVStrPtr-        A local variable that points at our string.
GVYield            textequ   <word ptr [bp+2]>
GVStrPtr           textequ   <dword ptr [bp-4]>
GetVowel           Iterator
                   push     bp
                   mov      bp, sp
; Create and initialize GVStrPtr. This is a pointer to the
; next character to process in the input string.
                   push      es
                   push      di
; Save original ES:DI values so we can restore them on YIELD
; and on termination.
                   push      es
                   push      di
;   Okay, here’s the main body    of the iterator. Fetch each
;   character until the end of    the string and see if it is
;   a vowel. If it is a vowel,    yield the index to it. If
;   it is not a vowel, move on    to the next character.
GVLoop:            les       di, GVStrPtr ;Ptr to next char.
                   mov       al, es:[di] ;Get this character.
                   cmp       al, 0        ;End of string?
                   je        GVDone
;   The following statement will convert all lower case
;   characters to upper case. It will also translate other
;   characters to who knows what, but we don’t care since
;   we only look at A, E, I, O, U, W, and Y.
                   and       al, 5fh
; See if this character is a vowel. This is a disgusting
; set membership operation.
                   cmp       al, ‘A’
                   je        IsAVowel
                   cmp       al, ‘E’
                   je        IsAVowel
                   cmp       al, ‘I’
                   je        IsAVowel
                   cmp       al, ‘O’
                   je        IsAVowel
                   cmp       al, ‘U’
                   je        IsAVowel
                   cmp       al, ‘W’
                   je        IsAVowel


                                                                             Page 671
Chapter 12

                                cmp      al, ‘Y’
                                jne      NotAVowel
             ;   If we’ve got a vowel we need to yield the index into
             ;   the string to that vowel. To compute the index, we
             ;   restore the original ES:DI values (which points at
             ;   the beginning of the string) and subtract the current
             ;   position (now in AX) from the first position. This
             ;   produces a zero-based index into the string.
             ;   This code must also increment the corresponding entry
             ;   in the VowelCnt array so we can print the results
             ;   later. Unlike the Pascal code, we’ve converted lower
             ;   case to upper case so the count for upper and lower
             ;   case characters will appear in the upper case slot.
             IsAVowel:          push     bx           ;Bump the vowel
                                mov      ah, 0        ; count by one.
                                mov      bx, ax
                                shl      bx, 1
                                inc      VowelCnt[bx]
                                pop      bx
                                mov      ax, di
                                pop      di            ;Restore original DI
                                sub      ax, di        ;Compute index.
                                pop      es            ;Restore original ES
                                push     bp            ;Save our frame pointer
                                call     GVYield       ;Yield to caller
                                pop      bp            ;Restore our frame pointer
                                push     es            ;Save ES:DI again
                                push     di
             ;   Whether it was a vowel or not, we’ve now got to move
             ;   on to the next character in the string. Increment
             ;   our string pointer by one and repeat the process
             ;   over again.
             NotAVowel:         inc      wp GVStrPtr
                                jmp      GVLoop
             ;   If we’ve reached the end of the string, terminate
             ;   the iterator here. We need to restore the original
             ;   ES:DI values, remove local variables, pop the YIELD
             ;   address, and then return to the termination address.
             GVDone:            pop      di            ;Restore ES:DI
                                pop      es
                                mov      sp, bp        ;Remove locals
                                add      sp, 2         ;Pop YIELD address
                                pop      bp
                                ret
             GetVowel           endi
             Main               proc
                                mov      ax, dseg
                                mov      ds, ax
                                mov      es, ax
                                print
                                byte     “Enter a string: “,0
                                lesi     InputStr
                                gets                  ;Read input line.
             ;   The following is the foreach loop. Note that the label
             ;   “FOREACH” is present for documentation purpose only.
             ;   In fact, the foreach loop always begins with the first
             ;   instruction after the call to GetVowel.
             ;
             ;   One other note: this assembly language code uses
             ;   zero-based indexes for the string. The Pascal version
             ;   uses one-based indexes for strings. So the actual
             ;   numbers printed will be different. If you want the
             ;   values printed by both programs to be identical,


Page 672
                                                                             Procedures: Advanced Topics

            ; uncomment the INC instruction below.
                                push       offset ForDone              ;Termination address.
                                call       GetVowel                    ;Start iterator
            FOREACH:            mov        bx, ax
                                print
                                byte       “Vowel “,0
                                mov        al, InputStr[bx]
                                putc
                                print
                                byte       “ at position “,0
                                mov        ax, bx
            ;                   inc        ax
                                puti
                                putcr
                                ret                                    ;Iterator resume.
            ForDone:            printf
                                byte       “# of A’s:   %d\n”
                                byte       “# of E’s:   %d\n”
                                byte       “# of I’s:   %d\n”
                                byte       “# of O’s:   %d\n”
                                byte       “# of U’s:   %d\n”
                                byte       “# of W’s:   %d\n”
                                byte       “# of Y’s:   %d\n”,0
                                dword      VowelCnt +   (‘A’*2)
                                dword      VowelCnt +   (‘E’*2)
                                dword      VowelCnt +   (‘I’*2)
                                dword      VowelCnt +   (‘O’*2)
                                dword      VowelCnt +   (‘U’*2)
                                dword      VowelCnt +   (‘W’*2)
                                dword      VowelCnt +   (‘Y’*2)
            Quit:               ExitPgm                                ;DOS macro to quit program.
            Main                endp
            cseg                ends
            sseg                segment    para stack ‘stack’
            stk                 byte       1024 dup (“stack “)
            sseg                ends
            zzzzzzseg           segment    para public ‘zzzzzz’
            LastBytes           db         16 dup (?)
            zzzzzzseg           ends
                                end        Main



12.6.2   Another Iterator Example

                 One problem with the iterator examples appearing in this chapter up to this point is
            that they do not access any global or intermediate variables. Furthermore, these examples
            do not work if an iterator is recursive or calls other procedures that yield the value to the
            foreach loop. The major problem with the examples up to this point has been that the
            foreach loop body has been responsible for reloading the bp register with a pointer to the
            foreach loop’s procedure’s activation record. Unfortunately, the foreach loop body has to
            assume that bp currently points at the iterator’s activation record so it can get a pointer to
            its own activation record from that activation record. This will not be the case if the itera-
            tor’s activation record is not the one on the top of the stack.
                To rectify this problem, the code doing the yield operation must set up the bp register
            so that it points at the activation record of the procedure containing the foreach loop before
            returning back to the loop. This is a somewhat complex operation. The following macro
            accomplishes this from inside an iterator:
            Yield               macro
                                mov        dx, [BP+2]                  ;Place to yield back to.
                                push       bp                          ;Save Iterator link
                                mov        bp, [bp]                    ;Get ptr to caller's A.R.


                                                                                                 Page 673
Chapter 12

                                      call     dx                         ;Push resume address and rtn.
                                      pop      bp                         ;Restore ptr to our A. R.
                                      endm

             Note an unfortunate side effect of this code is that it modifies the dx register. Therefore, the
             iterator does not preserve the dx register across a call to the iterator function.
                  The macro above assumes that the bp register points at the iterator’s activation record.
             If it does not, then you must execution some additional instructions to follow the static
             links back to the iterator’s activation record to obtain the address of the foreach loop proce-
             dure’s activation record.
             ;   ITERS.ASM
             ;
             ;   Roughly corresponds to the example in Ghezzi & Jazayeri's
             ;   "Programming Language Concepts" text.
             ;
             ;   Randall Hyde
             ;
             ;
             ;   This program demonstrates an implementation of:
             ;
             ;   l := 0;
             ;   foreach i in range(1,3) do
             ;       foreach j in iter2() do
             ;                 writeln(i, ',', j, ',', l):
             ;
             ;
             ;   iterator range(start,stop):integer;
             ;   begin
             ;
             ;          while start <= stop do begin
             ;
             ;                        yield start;
             ;                        start := start+1;
             ;          end;
             ;   end;
             ;
             ;   iterator iter2:integer;
             ;   var k:integer;
             ;   begin
             ;
             ;          foreach k in iter3 do
             ;                    yield k;
             ;   end;
             ;
             ;   iterator iter3:integer;
             ;   begin
             ;
             ;          l := l + 1;
             ;          yield 1;
             ;          l := l + 1;
             ;          yield 2;
             ;          l := l + 1;
             ;          yield 0;
             ;   end;
             ;
             ;
             ;   This code will print:
             ;
             ;          1,   1,   1
             ;          1,   2,   2
             ;          1,   0,   3
             ;          2,   1,   4
             ;          2,   2,   5
             ;          2,   0,   6
             ;          3,   1,   7
             ;          3,   2,   8
             ;          3,   0,   9



Page 674
                                                          Procedures: Advanced Topics


                   .xlist
                   include stdlib.a
                   includelibstdlib.lib
                   .list

                   .286                              ;Allow extra adrs modes.

dseg               segment   para stack 'data'

; Put the stack in the data segment so we can use the small memory model
; to simplify addressing:

stk                byte      1024 dup ('stack')
EndStk             word      0

dseg               ends

cseg               segment   para public 'code'
                   assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg, ss:dseg

; Here's the structure of a resume frame. Note that this structure isn't
; actually used in this code. It is only provided to show you what data
; is sitting on the stack when Yield builds a resume frame.

RsmFrm             struct
ResumeAdrs         word      ?
IteratorLink       word      ?
RsmFrm             ends


;   The following macro builds a resume frame and the returns to the caller
;   of an iterator. It assumes that the iterator and whoever called the
;   iterator have the standard activation record defined above and that we
;   are building the standard resume frame described above.
;
;   This code wipes out the DX register. Whoever calls the iterator cannot
;   count on DX being preserved, likewise, the iterator cannot count on DX
;   being preserved across a yield. Presumably, the iterator returns its
;   value in AX.

ActRec             struct
DynamicLink        word      ?             ;Saved BP value.
YieldAdrs          word      ?             ;Return Adrs for proc.
StaticLink         word      ?             ;Static link for proc.
ActRec             ends

AR                 equ       [bp].ActRec

Yield              macro
                   mov       dx, AR.YieldAdrs        ;Place to yield back to.
                   push      bp                      ;Save Iterator link
                   mov       bp, AR.DynamicLink      ;Get ptr to caller's A.R.
                   call      dx                      ;Push resume address and rtn.
                   pop       bp                      ;Restore ptr to our A. R.
                   endm


; Range(start, stop) - Yields start..stop and then fails.

; The following structure defines the activation record for Range:

rngAR              struct
DynamicLink        word      ?             ;Saved BP value.
YieldAdrs          word      ?             ;Return Adrs for proc.
StaticLink         word      ?             ;Static link for proc.
FailAdrs           word      ?             ;Go here when we fail
Stop               word      ?             ;Stop parameter
Start              word      ?             ;Start parameter



                                                                            Page 675
Chapter 12

             rngAR              ends

             rAR                equ         [bp].rngAR


             Range              proc
                                push        bp
                                mov         bp, sp

             ; While start <= stop, yield start:

             WhlStartLEStop:    mov         ax, rAR.Start ;Also puts return value
                                cmp         ax, rAR.Stop ; in AX.
                                jnle        RangeFail

                                yield

                                inc         rAR.Start
                                jmp         WhlStartLEStop

             RangeFail:         pop         bp           ;Restore Dynamic Link.
                                add         sp, 4        ;Skip ret adrs and S.L.
                                ret     4                ;Return through fail address.
             Range              endp


             ;   Iter2- Just calls iter3() and returns whatever value it generates.
             ;
             ;   Note: Since iter2 and iter3 are at the same lex level, the static link
             ;   passed to iter3 must be the same as the static link passed to iter2.
             ;   This is why the "push [bp]" instruction appears below (as opposed to the
             ;   "push bp" instruction which appears in the calls to Range and iter2).
             ;   Keep in mind, Range and iter2 are only called from main and bp contains
             ;   the static link at that point. This is not true when iter2 calls iter3.

             iter2              proc
                                push        bp
                                mov         bp, sp

                                push        offset i3Fail ;Failure address.
                                push        [bp]          ;Static link is link to main.
                                call        iter3
                                yield                    ;Return value returned by iter3
                                ret                      ;Resume Iter3.

             i3Fail:            pop         bp           ;Restore Dynamic Link.
                                add         sp, 4        ;Skip return address & S.L.
                                ret                      ;Return through fail address.
             iter2              endp


             ; Iter3() simply yields the values 1, 2, and 0:

             iter3              proc
                                push        bp
                                mov         bp, sp

                                mov         bx, AR.StaticLink;Point BX at main's AR.
                                inc         word ptr [bx-6];Increment L in main.
                                mov         ax, 1
                                yield

                                mov         bx, AR.StaticLink
                                inc         word ptr [bx-6]
                                mov         ax, 2
                                yield
                                mov         bx, AR.StaticLink
                                inc         word ptr [bx-6]
                                mov         ax, 0
                                yield


Page 676
                                                            Procedures: Advanced Topics


                   pop       bp             ;Restore Dynamic Link.
                   add       sp, 4          ;Skip return address & S.L.
                   ret                      ;Return through fail address.
iter3              endp


; Main's local variables are allocated on the stack in order to justify
; the use of static links.

i                  equ       [bp-2]
j                  equ       [bp-4]
l                  equ       [bp-6]

Main               proc
                   mov       ax,   dseg
                   mov       ds,   ax
                   mov       es,   ax
                   mov       ss,   ax
                   mov       sp,   offset EndStk

; Allocate storage for i, j, and l on the stack:

                   mov       bp, sp
                   sub       sp, 6

                   meminit

                   mov       word ptr l, 0 ;Initialize l.

; foreach i in range(1,3) do:

                   push      1            ;Parameters.
                   push      3
                   push      offset iFail ;Failure address.
                   push      bp          ;Static link points at our AR.
                   call      Range

; Yield from range comes here.       The label is for your benefit.

RangeYield:        mov       i, ax          ;Save away loop control value.

; foreach j in iter2 do:

                   push      offset jfail    ;Failure address.
                   push      bp              ;Static link points at our AR.
                   call      iter2

; Yield from iter2 comes here:

iter2Yield:        mov       j, ax

                   mov       ax, i
                   puti
                   print
                   byte      ", ",0
                   mov       ax, j
                   puti
                   print
                   byte      ", ",0
                   mov       ax, l
                   puti
                   putcr

; Restart iter2:

                   ret                      ;Resume iterator.

; Restart Range down here:



                                                                              Page 677
Chapter 12

                jFail:                ret                     ;Resume iterator.

                ; All Done!

                iFail:                print
                                      byte      cr,lf,"All Done!",cr,lf,0

                Quit:                 ExitPgm                 ;DOS macro to quit program.
                Main                  endp

                cseg                  ends

                ; zzzzzzseg must be the last segment that gets loaded into memory!
                ; This is where the heap begins.

                zzzzzzseg             segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
                LastBytes             db        16 dup (?)
                zzzzzzseg             ends
                                      end       Main



12.7     Laboratory Exercises
                    This chapter’s laboratory exercises consist of three components. In the first exercise
                you will experiment with a fairly complex set of iterators. In the second exercise you will
                learn how the 80286’s enter and leave instructions operate. In the third exercise, you will
                run some experiments on parameter passing mechanisms.


12.7.1       Iterator Exercise

                     In this laboratory exercise you will be working with a program (Ex12_1.asm on the
                companion CD-ROM) that uses four iterators. The first three iterators perform some fairly
                simple computations, the fourth iterator returns (successively) pointers to the first three
                iterators’ code that the main program can use to call these iterators.
                     For your lab report: study the following code and explain how it works. Run it and
                explain the output. Assemble the program with the “/Zi” option, then from within Code-
                View, set a breakpoint on the first instruction of the four iterators. Run the program up to
                these break points and dump the memory starting at the current stack pointer value
                (ss:sp). Describe the meaning of the data on the stack at each breakpoint. Also, set a break-
                point on the “call ax” instruction. Trace into the routine ax points at upon each breakpoint
                and describe which routine this instruction calls. How many times does this instruction
                execute?
                ;   EX12_1.asm
                ;
                ;   Program to support the laboratory exercise in Chapter 12.
                ;
                ;   This program combines iterators, passing parameters as parameters,
                ;   and procedural parameters all into the same program.
                ;
                ;
                ;   This program implements the following iterators (examples written in panacea):
                ;
                ;   program EX12_1;
                ;
                ;   fib:iterator(n:integer):integer;
                ;   var
                ;        CurIndex:integer;
                ;        Fn1:       integer;
                ;        Fn2:       integer;
                ;   endvar;
                ;   begin fib;
                ;


Page 678
                                                      Procedures: Advanced Topics

;      yield 1; (* Always have at least n=0 *)
;      if (n <> 0) then
;
;                yield 1; (* Have at least n=1 at this point *)
;
;                Fn1 := 1;
;                Fn2 := 1;
;                foreach CurIndex in 2..n do
;
;                           yield Fn1+Fn2;
;                           Fn2 = Fn1;
;                           Fn1 = CurIndex;
;
;                endfor;
;      endif;
;
; end fib;
;
;
;
; UpDown:iterator(n:integer):integer;
; var
;      CurIndex:integer;
; endvar;
; begin UpDown;
;
;      foreach CurIndex in 0..n do
;
;                yield CurIndex;
;
;      endfor;
;      foreach CurIndex in n-1..0 do
;
;                yield CurIndex;
;
;      endfor;
;
; end UpDown;
;
;
;
; SumToN:iterator(n:integer):integer;
; var
;      CurIndex:integer;
;      Sum:        integer;
; endvar;
; begin SumToN;
;
;      Sum := 0;
;      foreach CurIndex in 0..n do
;
;                Sum := Sum + CurIndex;
;                yield Sum;
;
;      endfor;
;
; end SumToN;
;
;
; MultiIter returns a pointer to an iterator that accepts a single integer
parameter.
;
; MultiIter: iterator: [iterator(n:integer)];
; begin MultiIter;
;
;      yield @Fib;(* Return pointers to the three iterators above *)
;      yield @UpDown;(* as the result of this iterator.*)
;      yield @SumToN;
;
; end MultiIter;


                                                                        Page 679
Chapter 12

             ;
             ;
             ;   var
             ;        i:integer;
             ;        n:integer;
             ;        iter:[iterator(n:integer)];
             ;   endvar;
             ;
             ;   begin EX12_1;
             ;
             ;         (* The following for loop repeats six times, passing its loop index as*)
             ;         (* the parameter to the Fib, UpDown, and SumToN parameters.*)
             ;
             ;         foreach n in 0..5 do
             ;
             ;
             ;         (*   The following (funny looking) iterator sequences through *)
             ;         (*   each of the three iterators: Fib, UpDown, and SumToN. It*)
             ;         (*   returns a pointer as the iterator value. The innermost *)
             ;         (*   foreach loop uses this pointer to call the appropriate   *)
             ;         (*   iterator.                                                *)
             ;
             ;                     foreach iter in MultiIter do
             ;
             ;                     (* Okay, this for loop invokes whatever iterator was *)
             ;                     (* return by the MultiIter iterator above.           *)
             ;
             ;                                foreach i in [MultiIter](n) do
             ;
             ;                                  write(i:3);
             ;
             ;                                endfor;
             ;                                writeln;
             ;
             ;                     endfor;
             ;                     writeln;
             ;
             ;         endfor;
             ;
             ;   end EX12_1;

                                   .xlist
                                   include stdlib.a
                                   includelibstdlib.lib
                                   .list

                                   .286                              ;Allow extra adrs modes.


             wp                    textequ    <word ptr>
             ofs                   textequ    <offset>


             dseg                  segment    para public 'code'
             dseg                  ends


             cseg                  segment    para public 'code'
                                   assume     cs:cseg, ss:sseg


             ;   The following macro builds a resume frame and the returns to the caller
             ;   of an iterator. It assumes that the iterator and whoever called the
             ;   iterator have the standard activation record defined above and that we
             ;   are building the standard resume frame described above.
             ;
             ;   This code wipes out the DX register. Whoever calls the iterator cannot
             ;   count on DX being preserved, likewise, the iterator cannot count on DX
             ;   being preserved across a yield. Presumably, the iterator returns its
             ;   value in AX.


Page 680
                                                         Procedures: Advanced Topics



Yield            macro
                 mov        dx, [BP+2]    ;Place to yield back to.
                 push       bp            ;Save Iterator link
                 mov        bp, [bp]      ;Get ptr to caller's A.R.
                 call       dx            ;Push resume address and rtn.
                 pop        bp            ;Restore ptr to our A. R.
                 endm


; Fib(n) - Yields the sequence of fibonacci numbers from F(0)..F(n).
;         The fibonacci sequence is defined as:
;
;                F(0) and F(1) = 1.
;                F(n) = F(n-1) + F(n-2) for n > 1.


; The following structure defines the activation record for Fib

CurIndex         textequ    <[bp-6]>      ;Current sequence value.
Fn1              textequ    <[bp-4]>      ;F(n-1) value.
Fn2              textequ    <[bp-2]>      ;F(n-2) value.
DynamicLink      textequ    <[bp]>        ;Saved BP value.
YieldAdrs        textequ    <[bp+2]>      ;Return Adrs for proc.
FailAdrs         textequ    <[bp+4]>      ;Go here when we fail
n                textequ    <[bp+6]>      ;The initial parameter


Fib              proc
                 push       bp
                 mov        bp, sp
                 sub        sp, 6         ;Make room for local variables.

; We will also begin yielding values starting at F(0).
; Since F(0) and F(1) are special cases, yield their values here.

                 mov        ax, 1         ;Yield F(0) (we always return at least
                 yield                    ; F(0)).

                 cmp        wp n, 1       ;See if user called this with n=0.
                 jb         FailFib
                 mov        ax, 1
                 yield

; Okay, n >=1 so we need to go into a loop to handle the remaining values.
; First, begin by initializing Fn1 and Fn2 as appropriate.

                 mov        wp Fn1, 1
                 mov        wp Fn2, 1
                 mov        wp CurIndex, 2

WhlLp:           mov        ax, CurIndex ;See if CurIndex > n.
                 cmp        ax, n
                 ja         FailFib

                 push       Fn1
                 mov        ax, Fn1
                 add        ax, Fn2
                 pop        Fn2           ;Fn1 becomes the new Fn2 value.
                 mov        Fn1, ax       ;Current value becomes new Fn1 value.
                 yield                    ;Yield the current value.

                 inc        wp CurIndex
                 jmp        WhlLp



FailFib:         mov       sp, bp         ;Deallocate local vars.
                 pop       bp             ;Restore Dynamic Link.


                                                                            Page 681
Chapter 12

                             add     sp, 2         ;Skip ret adrs.
                             ret     2             ;Return through fail address.
             Fib             endp


             ; UpDown-      This function yields the sequence 0, 1, 2, ..., n, n-1,
             ;              n-2, ..., 1, 0.

             i              textequ <[bp-2]>       ;F(n-2) value.

             UpDown          proc
                             push    bp
                             mov      bp, sp
                             sub      sp, 2        ;Make room for i.

                             mov      wp i, 0      ;Initialize our index variable (i).
             UptoN:          mov      ax, i
                             cmp      ax, n
                             jae      GoDown

                             yield

                             inc      wp i
                             jmp      UpToN

             GoDown:         mov      ax, i
                             yield
                             mov      ax, i
                             cmp      ax, 0
                             je       UpDownDone
                             dec      wp i
                             jmp      GoDown

             UpDownDone:     mov      sp, bp       ;Deallocate local vars.
                             pop      bp           ;Restore Dynamic Link.
                             add      sp, 2        ;Skip ret adrs.
                             ret      2            ;Return through fail address.
             UpDown          endp



             ; SumToN(n)-    This iterator returns 1, 2, 3, 6, 10, ... sum(n) where
             ;               sum(n) = 1+2+3+4+...+n (e.g., n(n+1)/2);

             j              textequ <[bp-2]>
             k               textequ <[bp-4]>

             SumToN          proc
                             push     bp
                             mov      bp, sp
                             sub      sp, 4        ;Make room for j and k.

                             mov      wp j, 0      ;Initialize our index variable (j).
                             mov      wp k, 0      ;Initialize our sum (k).
             SumLp:          mov      ax, j
                             cmp      ax, n
                             ja       SumDone

                             add      ax, k
                             mov      k, ax

                             yield

                             inc      wp j
                             jmp      SumLp

             SumDone:        mov     sp, bp        ;Deallocate local vars.
                             pop     bp            ;Restore Dynamic Link.
                             add     sp, 2         ;Skip ret adrs.
                             ret     2             ;Return through fail address.


Page 682
                                                          Procedures: Advanced Topics

SumToN           endp




; MultiIter- This iterator returns a pointer to each of the above iterators.

MultiIter        proc
                 push        bp
                 mov         bp, sp

                 mov         ax, ofs Fib
                 yield
                 mov         ax, ofs UpDown
                 yield
                 mov         ax, ofs SumToN
                 yield

                 pop         bp
                 add         sp, 2
                 ret
MultiIter        endp


Main             proc
                 mov         ax, dseg
                 mov         ds, ax
                 mov         es, ax
                 meminit

; foreach bx in 0..5 do

                 mov         bx, 0         ;Loop control variable for outer loop.
WhlBXle5:

; foreach ax in MultiIter do

                 push        ofs MultiDone ;Failure address.
                 call        MultiIter     ;Get iterator to call.


; foreach i in [ax](bx) do

                 push        bx           ;Push "n" (bx) onto the stack.
                 push        ofs IterDone ;Failure Address
                 call        ax           ;Call the iterator pointed at by the
;                                         ; return value from MultiIter.
;
; write(ax:3);

                 mov      cx, 3
                 putisize
                 ret

; endfor, writeln;

IterDone:        putcr                     ;Writeln;
                 ret

; endfor, writeln;

MultiDone:       putcr
                 inc         bx
                 cmp         bx, 5
                 jbe         WhlBXle5

; endfor

Quit:            ExitPgm                   ;DOS macro to quit program.


                                                                            Page 683
Chapter 12

                Main                endp

                cseg               ends


                sseg                segment    para stack 'stack'
                stk                 word       1024 dup (0)
                sseg                ends

                zzzzzzseg           segment    para public 'zzzzzz'
                LastBytes           db         16 dup (?)
                zzzzzzseg           ends
                                    end        Main



12.7.2       The 80x86 Enter and Leave Instructions

                    The following code (Ex12_2.asm on the companion CD-ROM) uses the 80x86 enter
                and leave instructions to maintain a display in a block structured program. Assemble this
                program with the “/Zi” option and load it into CodeView. Set breakpoints on the calls to
                the Lex1, Lex2, Lex3, and Lex4 procedures. Run the program and when you encounter a
                breakpoint, use the F8 key to single step into each procedure. Single step over the enter
                instruction (to the following nop). Note the values of the bp and sp register before and after
                the execution of the enter instruction.
                    For your lab report: explain the values in the bp and sp registers after executing each
                enter instruction. Dump memory from ss:sp to about ss:sp+32 using a memory window or
                the dw command in the command window. Describe the contents of the stack after the exe-
                cution of each enter instruction.
                    After executing through the enter instruction in the Lex4 procedure, set a breakpoint
                on each of the leave instructions. Run the program at full speed (using the F5 key) until
                you hit each of these leave instructions. Note the values of the bp and sp registers before
                and after the execution of each leave instruction. For your lab report: include these bp/sp
                values in your lab report and explain them.
                ;   EX12_2.asm
                ;
                ;   Program to demonstrate the ENTER and LEAVE instructions in Chapter 12.
                ;
                ;   This program simulates the following Pascal code:
                ;
                ;   program EnterLeave;
                ;   var i:integer;
                ;
                ;      procedure Lex1;
                ;      var j:integer;
                ;
                ;        procedure Lex2;
                ;        var k:integer;
                ;
                ;            procedure Lex3;
                ;            var m:integer;
                ;
                ;                   procedure Lex4;
                ;                   var n:integer;
                ;                   begin
                ;
                ;                              writeln('Lex4');
                ;                              for i:= 0 to 3 do
                ;                                  for j:= 0 to 2 do
                ;                                write('(',i,',',j,') ');
                ;                              writeln;
                ;                              for k:= 1 downto 0 do
                ;                                for m:= 1 downto 0 do
                ;                                  for n := 0 to 1 do
                ;                                write('(',m,',',k,',',n,') ');


Page 684
                                                         Procedures: Advanced Topics

;                          writeln;
;                 end;
;
;          begin {Lex3}
;
;                 writeln('Lex3');
;                 for i := 0 to 1 do
;                     for j := 0 to 1 do
;                          for k := 0 to 1 do
;                               for m := 0 to 1 do
;                            writeln(i,j,k,m);
;
;                 Lex4;
;
;          end; {Lex3}
;
;      begin {Lex2}
;
;          writeln('Lex2');
;          for i := 1 downto 0 do
;                 for j := 0 to 1 do
;                     for k := 1 downto 0 do
;                          write(i,j,k,' ');
;          writeln;
;
;          Lex3;
;
;      end; {Lex2}
;
;    begin {Lex1}
;
;      writeln('Lex1');
;      Lex2;
;
;    end; {Lex1}
;
; begin {Main (lex0)}
;
;      writeln('Main Program');
;      Lex1;
;
; end.
                  .xlist
                  include     stdlib.a
                  includelib stdlib.lib
                  .list
                   .286                              ;Allow ENTER & LEAVE.
; Common equates all the procedures use:
wp                 textequ   <word   ptr>
disp1              textequ   <word   ptr [bp-2]>
disp2              textequ   <word   ptr [bp-4]>
disp3              textequ   <word   ptr [bp-6]>
;   Note: the data segment and the stack segment are one and the same in this
;   program. This is done to allow the use of the [bx] addressing mode when
;   referencing local and intermediate variables without having to use a
;   stack segment prefix.
sseg               segment   para stack 'stack'
i                  word      ?                       ;Main program variable.
stk                word      2046 dup (0)
sseg               ends

cseg               segment   para public 'code'
                   assume    cs:cseg, ds:sseg, ss:sseg

; Main's activation record looks like this:
;

                                                                             Page 685
Chapter 12

             ;        | return address |<- SP, BP
             ;        |----------------|

             Main               proc
                                mov       ax, ss      ;Make SS=DS to simplify addressing
                                mov       ds, ax      ; (there will be no need to stick "SS:"
                                mov       es, ax      ; in front of addressing modes like
                                                      ; "[bx]").
                                print
                                byte      "Main Program",cr,lf,0
                                call      Lex1
             Quit:              ExitPgm                ;DOS macro to quit program.
             Main               endp

             ; Lex1's activation record looks like this:
             ;
             ;      | return address |
             ;      |----------------|
             ;      | Dynamic Link   | <- BP
             ;      |----------------|
             ;      | Lex1's AR Ptr | | Display
             ;      |----------------|
             ;      | J Local var    | <- SP (BP-4)
             ;      |----------------|
             Lex1_J             textequ   <word ptr [bx-4]>
             Lex1               proc      near
                                enter     2, 1        ;A 2 byte local variable at lex level 1.
                                nop                   ;Spacer instruction for single stepping
                                print
                                byte      "Lex1",cr,lf,0
                                call      Lex2
                                leave
                                ret
             Lex1               endp

             ; Lex2's activation record looks like this:
             ;
             ;      | return address |
             ;      |----------------|
             ;      | Dynamic Link   | <- BP
             ;      |----------------|
             ;      | Lex1's AR Ptr | |
             ;      |----------------| | Display
             ;      | Lex2's AR Ptr | |
             ;      |----------------|
             ;      | K Local var    | <- SP (BP-6)
             ;      |----------------|
             ;
             ;          writeln('Lex2');
             ;          for i := 1 downto 0 do
             ;                for j := 0 to 1 do
             ;                    for k := 1 downto 0 do
             ;                         write(i,j,k,' ');
             ;          writeln;
             ;
             ;          Lex3;
             Lex2_k             textequ   <word ptr [bx-6]>
             k                  textequ   <word ptr [bp-6]>
             Lex2               proc      near
                                enter     2, 2        ;A 2-byte local variable at lex level 2.
                                nop                   ;Spacer instruction for single stepping
                                print
                                byte      "Lex2",cr,lf,0
                                mov       i, 1


Page 686
                                                         Procedures: Advanced Topics

ForLpI:          mov       bx, disp1    ;"J" is at lex level one.
                 mov       Lex1_J, 0
ForLpJ:          mov       k, 1         ;"K" is local.
ForLpK:          mov       ax, i
                 puti
                 mov       bx, disp1
                 mov       ax, Lex1_J
                 puti
                 mov       ax, k
                 puti
                 mov       al, ' '
                 putc
                 dec       k            ;Decrement from 1->0 and quit
                 jns       ForLpK       ; if we hit -1.
                 mov       bx, disp1
                 inc       Lex1_J
                 cmp       Lex1_J, 2
                 jb        ForLpJ
                 dec       i
                 jns       ForLpI
                 putcr
                 call      Lex3
                 leave
                 ret
Lex2             endp

; Lex3's activation record looks like this:
;
;      | return address |
;      |----------------|
;      | Dynamic Link   | <- BP
;      |----------------|
;      | Lex1's AR Ptr | |
;      |----------------| |
;      | Lex2's AR Ptr | | Display
;      |----------------| |
;      | Lex3's AR Ptr | |
;      |----------------|
;      | M Local var    | <- SP (BP-8)
;      |----------------|
;
;                writeln('Lex3');
;                for i := 0 to 1 do
;                    for j := 0 to 1 do
;                         for k := 0 to 1 do
;                              for m := 0 to 1 do
;                            writeln(i,j,k,m);
;
;                Lex4;
Lex3_M           textequ   <word ptr [bx-8]>
m                textequ   <word ptr [bp-8]>
Lex3             proc      near
                 enter     2, 3         ;2-byte variable at lex level 3.
                 nop                    ;Spacer instruction for single stepping
                 print
                 byte      "Lex3",cr,lf,0
                 mov       i, 0
ForILp:          mov       bx, disp1
                 mov       Lex1_J, 0
ForJlp:          mov       bx, disp2
                 mov       Lex2_K, 0
ForKLp:          mov       m, 0
ForMLp:          mov       ax, i


                                                                           Page 687
Chapter 12

                              puti
                              mov       bx, disp1
                              mov       ax, Lex1_J
                              puti
                              mov       bx, disp2
                              mov       ax, Lex2_k
                              puti
                              mov       ax, m
                              puti
                              putcr
                              inc       m
                              cmp       m, 2
                              jb        ForMLp
                              mov       bx, disp2
                              inc       Lex2_K
                              cmp       Lex2_K, 2
                              jb        ForKLp
                              mov       bx, disp1
                              inc       Lex1_J
                              cmp       Lex1_J, 2
                              jb        ForJLp
                              inc       i
                              cmp       i, 2
                              jb        ForILp
                              call      Lex4
                              leave
                              ret
             Lex3             endp

             ; Lex4's activation record looks like this:
             ;
             ;      | return address |
             ;      |----------------|
             ;      | Dynamic Link   | <- BP
             ;      |----------------|
             ;      | Lex1's AR Ptr | |
             ;      |----------------| |
             ;      | Lex2's AR Ptr | |
             ;      |----------------| | Display
             ;      | Lex3's AR Ptr | |
             ;      |----------------| |
             ;      | Lex4's AR Ptr | |
             ;      |----------------|
             ;      | N Local var    | <- SP (BP-10)
             ;      |----------------|
             ;
             ;
             ;      writeln('Lex4');
             ;      for i:= 0 to 3 do
             ;        for j:= 0 to 2 do
             ;                write('(',i,',',j,') ');
             ;      writeln;
             ;      for k:= 1 downto 0 do
             ;        for m:= 1 downto 0 do
             ;          for n := 0 to 1 do
             ;                write('(',m,',',k,',',n,') ');
             ;      writeln;
             n                textequ   <word ptr [bp-10]>
             Lex4             proc      near
                              enter     2, 4         ;2-byte local variable at lex level 4.
                              nop                    ;Spacer instruction for single stepping
                              print
                              byte      "Lex4",cr,lf,0



Page 688
                                                  Procedures: Advanced Topics

            mov       i, 0
ForILp:     mov       bx, disp1
            mov       Lex1_J, 0
ForJLp:     mov       al, '('
            putc
            mov       ax, i
            puti
            mov       al, ','
            putc
            mov       ax, Lex1_J   ;Note that BX still contains disp1.
            puti
            print
            byte      ") ",0
            inc       Lex1_J       ;BX still contains disp1.
            cmp       Lex1_J, 3
            jb        ForJLp
            inc       i
            cmp       i, 4
            jb        ForILp
            putcr
            mov       bx, disp2
            mov       Lex2_K, 1
ForKLp:     mov       bx, disp3
            mov       Lex3_M, 1
ForMLp:     mov       n, 0
ForNLp:     mov       al, '('
            putc
            mov       bx, disp3
            mov       ax, Lex3_M
            puti
            mov       al, ','
            putc
            mov       bx, disp2
            mov       ax, Lex2_K
            puti
            mov       al, ','
            putc
            mov       ax, n
            puti
            print
            byte      ") ",0
            inc       n
            cmp       n, 2
            jb        ForNLp
            mov       bx, disp3
            dec       Lex3_M
            jns       ForMLp
            mov       bx, disp2
            dec       Lex2_K
            jns       ForKLp
            leave
            ret
Lex4        endp
cseg        ends

zzzzzzseg   segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
LastBytes   db        16 dup (?)
zzzzzzseg   ends
            end       Main




                                                                    Page 689
Chapter 12


12.7.3       Parameter Passing Exercises

                    The following exercise demonstrates some simple parameter passing. This program
                passes arrays by reference, word variables by value and by reference, and some functions
                and procedure by reference. The program itself sorts two arrays using a generic sorting
                algorithm. The sorting algorithm is generic because the main program passes it a compar-
                ison function and a procedure to swap two elements if one is greater than the other.
                ; Ex12_3.asm
                ;
                ; This program demonstrates different parameter passing methods.
                ; It corresponds to the following (pseudo) Pascal code:
                ;
                ;
                ; program main;
                ; var i:integer;
                ;       a:array[0..255] of integer;
                ;       b:array[0..255] of unsigned;
                ;
                ; function LTint(int1, int2:integer):boolean;
                ; begin
                ;       LTint := int1 < int2;
                ; end;
                ;
                ; procedure SwapInt(var int1, int2:integer);
                ; var temp:integer;
                ; begin
                ;       temp := int1;
                ;       int1 := int2;
                ;       int2 := temp;
                ; end;
                ;
                ; function LTunsigned(uns1, uns2:unsigned):boolean;
                ; begin
                ;       LTunsigned := uns1 < uns2;
                ; end;
                ;
                ; procedure SwapUnsigned(uns1, uns2:unsigned);
                ; var temp:unsigned;
                ; begin
                ;       temp := uns1;
                ;       uns1 := uns2;
                ;       uns2 := temp;
                ; end;
                ;
                ; (* The following is a simple Bubble sort that will sort arrays containing *)
                ; (* arbitrary data types.                                                  *)
                ;
                ; procedure sort(data:array; elements:integer; function LT:boolean; procedure
                swap);
                ; var i,j:integer;
                ; begin
                ;
                ;       for i := 0 to elements-1 do
                ;           for j := i+1 to elements do
                ;                 if (LT(data[j], data[i])) then swap(data[i], data[j]);
                ; end;
                ;
                ;
                ; begin
                ;
                ;       for i := 0 to 255 do A[i] := 128-i;
                ;       for i := 0 to 255 do B[i] := 255-i;
                ;       sort(A, 256, LTint, SwapInt);
                ;       sort(B, 256, LTunsigned, SwapUnsigned);
                ;
                ;       for i := 0 to 255 do
                ;       begin


Page 690
                                                              Procedures: Advanced Topics

;                  if (i mod 8) = 0 then writeln;
;                  write(A[i]:5);
;        end;
;
;        for i := 0 to 255 do
;        begin
;                  if (i mod 8) = 0 then writeln;
;                  write(B[i]:5);
;        end;
;
; end;
                   .xlist
                   include    stdlib.a
                   includelib stdlib.lib
                   .list
                   .386
                   option         segment:use16
wp                 textequ        <word ptr>

dseg               segment   para public 'data'
A                  word      256 dup (?)
B                  word      256 dup (?)
dseg               ends

cseg               segment   para public 'code'
                   assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg, ss:sseg
;   function LTint(int1, int2:integer):boolean;
;   begin
;         LTint := int1 < int2;
;   end;
;
;   LTint's activation record looks like this:
;
;        |----------------|
;        |      int1      |
;        |----------------|
;        |      int2      |
;        |----------------|
;        | return address |
;        |----------------|
;        |    old BP      |<- SP, BP
;        |----------------|
int1               textequ   <word ptr [bp+6]>
int2               textequ   <word ptr [bp+4]>
LTint              proc      near
                   push      bp
                   mov       bp, sp

                   mov       ax, int1          ;Compare the two parameters
                   cmp       ax, int2          ; and return true if int1<int2.
                   setl      al                ;Signed comparison here.
                   mov       ah, 0             ;Be sure to clear H.O. byte.
                   pop       bp
                   ret       4
LTint              endp

; Swap's activation record looks like this:
;
;      |----------------|
;      |     Address    |
;      |---    of    ---|
;      |      int1      |
;      |----------------|
;      |     Address    |
;      |---    of    ---|
;      |      int2      |

                                                                                 Page 691
Chapter 12

             ;         |----------------|
             ;         | return address |
             ;         |----------------|
             ;         |    old BP      |<- SP, BP
             ;         |----------------|
             ;
             ;   The temporary variable is kept in a register.
             ;
             ;   Note that swapping integers or unsigned integers can be done
             ;   with the same code since the operations are identical for
             ;   either type.
             ;
             ;   procedure SwapInt(var int1, int2:integer);
             ;   var temp:integer;
             ;   begin
             ;         temp := int1;
             ;         int1 := int2;
             ;         int2 := temp;
             ;   end;
             ;
             ;   procedure SwapUnsigned(uns1, uns2:unsigned);
             ;   var temp:unsigned;
             ;   begin
             ;         temp := uns1;
             ;         uns1 := uns2;
             ;         uns2 := temp;
             ;   end;
             ;
             int1                textequ   <dword ptr [bp+8]>
             int2                textequ   <dword ptr [bp+4]>
             SwapInt             proc      near
                                 push      bp
                                 mov       bp, sp
                                 push      es
                                 push      bx
                                 les       bx,   int1      ;Get address of int1 variable.
                                 mov       ax,   es:[bx]   ;Get int1's value.
                                 les       bx,   int2      ;Get address of int2 variable.
                                 xchg      ax,   es:[bx]   ;Swap int1's value with int2's
                                 les       bx, int1        ;Get the address of int1 and
                                 mov       es:[bx], ax     ; store int2's value there.
                                 pop       bx
                                 pop       es
                                 pop       bp
                                 ret       8
             SwapInt             endp

             ;   LTunsigned's activation record looks like this:
             ;
             ;         |----------------|
             ;         |      uns1      |
             ;         |----------------|
             ;         |      uns2      |
             ;         |----------------|
             ;         | return address |
             ;         |----------------|
             ;         |    old BP      |<- SP, BP
             ;         |----------------|
             ;
             ;   function LTunsigned(uns1, uns2:unsigned):boolean;
             ;   begin
             ;         LTunsigned := uns1 < uns2;
             ;   end;
             uns1                textequ   <word ptr [bp+6]>
             uns2                textequ   <word ptr [bp+4]>
             LTunsigned          proc      near

Page 692
                                                         Procedures: Advanced Topics

                 push      bp
                 mov       bp, sp
                 mov       ax, uns1       ;Compare uns1 with uns2 and
                 cmp       ax, uns2       ; return true if uns1<uns2.
                 setb      al             ;Unsigned comparison.
                 mov       ah, 0          ;Return 16-bit boolean.
                 pop       bp
                 ret       4
LTunsigned       endp

; Sort's activation record looks like this:
;
;       |----------------|
;       |     Data's     |
;       |---          ---|
;       |    Address     |
;       |----------------|
;       |   Elements     |
;       |----------------|
;       |      LT's      |
;       |---          ---|
;       |    Address     |
;       |----------------|
;       |     Swap's     |
;       |---          ---|
;       |    Address     |
;       |----------------|
;       | return address |
;       |----------------|
;       |    old BP      |<- SP, BP
;       |----------------|
;
; procedure sort(data:array; elements:integer; function LT:boolean; procedure
swap);
; var i,j:integer;
; begin
;
;       for i := 0 to elements-1 do
;           for j := i+1 to elements do
;                 if (LT(data[j], data[i])) then swap(data[i], data[j]);
; end;
data             textequ   <dword ptr [bp+10]>
elements         textequ   <word ptr [bp+8]>
funcLT           textequ   <word ptr [bp+6]>
procSwap         textequ   <word ptr [bp+4]>
i                textequ   <word ptr [bp-2]>
j                textequ   <word ptr [bp-4]>
sort             proc      near
                 push      bp
                 mov       bp, sp
                 sub       sp, 4
                 push      es
                 push      bx
                 mov       i, 0
ForILp:          mov       ax, i
                 inc       i
                 cmp       ax, Elements
                 jae       IDone
                 mov       j, ax
ForJLp:          mov       ax, j
                 cmp       ax, Elements
                 ja        JDone
                 les       bx, data                 ;Push the value of
                 mov       si, j                    ; data[j] onto the
                 add       si, si                   ; stack.


                                                                           Page 693
Chapter 12

                              push     es:[bx+si]
                              les      bx, data                 ;Push the value of
                              mov      si, i                    ; data[i] onto the
                              add      si, si                   ; stack.
                              push     es:[bx+si]
                              call     FuncLT                   ;See if data[i] < data[j]
                              cmp      ax, 0                    ;Test boolean result.
                              je       NextJ
                              push     wp data+2                ;Pass data[i] by reference.
                              mov      ax, i
                              add      ax, ax
                              add      ax, wp data
                              push     ax
                              push     wp data+2                ;Pass data[j] by reference.
                              mov      ax, j
                              add      ax, ax
                              add      ax, wp data
                              push     ax
                              call     ProcSwap
             NextJ:           inc      j
                              jmp      ForJLp
             JDone:           inc      i
                              jmp      ForILp
             IDone:           pop      bx
                              pop      es
                              mov      sp, bp
                              pop      bp
                              ret      10
             sort             endp

             ; Main's activation record looks like this:
             ;
             ;       | return address |<- SP, BP
             ;       |----------------|
             ;
             ; begin
             ;
             ;       for i := 0 to 255 do A[i] := 128-i;
             ;       for i := 0 to 255 do B[i] := 33000-i;
             ;       sort(A, 256, LTint, SwapInt);
             ;       sort(B, 256, LTunsigned, SwapUnsigned);
             ;
             ;       for i := 0 to 255 do
             ;       begin
             ;                 if (i mod 8) = 0 then writeln;
             ;                 write(A[i]:5);
             ;       end;
             ;
             ;       for i := 0 to 255 do
             ;       begin
             ;                 if (i mod 8) = 0 then writeln;
             ;                 write(B[i]:5);
             ;       end;
             ;
             ; end;
             Main             proc
                              mov      ax, dseg      ;Initialize the segment registers.
                              mov      ds, ax
                              mov      es, ax
             ; Note that the following code merges the two initialization for loops
             ; into a single loop.
                              mov      ax, 128
                              mov      bx, 0


Page 694
                                                                             Procedures: Advanced Topics

                                 mov        cx, 33000
             ForILp:             mov        A[bx], ax
                                 mov        B[bx], cx
                                 add        bx, 2
                                 dec        ax
                                 dec        cx
                                 cmp        bx, 256*2
                                 jb         ForILp
                                 push       ds                          ;Seg address of A
                                 push       offset A                    ;Offset of A
                                 push       256                         ;# of elements in A
                                 push       offset LTint                ;Address of compare routine
                                 push       offset SwapInt              ;Address of swap routine
                                 call       Sort

                                 push       ds                          ;Seg address of B
                                 push       offset B                    ;Offset of B
                                 push       256                         ;# of elements in A
                                 push       offset LTunsigned           ;Address of compare routine
                                 push       offset SwapInt              ;Address of swap routine
                                 call       Sort
             ; Print the values in A.
                                 mov        bx, 0
             ForILp2:            test       bx, 0Fh                     ;See if (I mod 8) = 0
                                 jnz        NotMod                      ; note: BX mod 16 = I mod 8.
                                 putcr
             NotMod:             mov        ax, A[bx]
                                 mov        cx, 5
                                 putisize
                                 add        bx, 2
                                 cmp        bx, 256*2
                                 jb         ForILp2
             ; Print the values in B.
                              mov           bx, 0
             ForILp3:         test          bx, 0Fh                     ;See if (I mod 8) = 0
                              jnz           NotMod2                     ; note: BX mod 16 = I mod 8.
                              putcr
             NotMod2:         mov           ax, B[bx]
                              mov           cx, 5
                              putusize
                              add           bx, 2
                              cmp           bx, 256*2
                              jb            ForILp3
             Quit:               ExitPgm                   ;DOS macro to quit program.
             Main                endp
             cseg                ends

             sseg                segment    para stack 'stack'
             stk                 word       256 dup (0)
             sseg                ends

             zzzzzzseg           segment    para public 'zzzzzz'
             LastBytes           db         16 dup (?)
             zzzzzzseg           ends
                                 end        Main



12.8    Programming Projects
   1)        Write at iterator to which you pass an array of characters by reference. The iterator should
             return an index into the array that points at a whitespace character (any ASCII code less
             than or equal to a space) it finds. On each call, the iterator should return the index of the
             next whitespace character. The iterator should fail if it encounters a byte containing the
             value zero. Use local variables for any values the iterator needs.


                                                                                                 Page 695
Chapter 12

    2)       Write a recursive routine that does the following:
                     function recursive(i:integer):integer;
                     var j,k:integer;
                     begin
                               j := i;
                               k := i*i;
                               if (i >= 0) then writeln(‘AR Address =’, Recursive(i-1));
                               writeln(i,’ ‘,j,’ ‘,k);
                               recursive := Value in BP Register;
                     end;
             From your main program, call this procedure and pass it the value 10 on the stack. Verify
             that you get correct results back. Explain the results.

    3)       Write a program that contains a procedure to which you pass four parameters on the
             stack. These should be passed by value, reference, value-result, and result, respectively
             (for the value-result parameter, pass the address of the object on the stack). Inside that
             procedure, you should call three other procedures that also take four parameters (each).
             However, the first parameter should use pass by value for all four parameters; the second
             procedure should use pass by reference for all four parameters; and the third should use
             pass by value-result for all four parameters. Pass the four parameters in the enclosing pro-
             cedure as parameters to each of these three child procedures. Inside the child procedures,
             print the parameter’s values and change their results. Immediately upon return from each
             of these child procedures, print the parameters’ values. Write a main program that passes
             four local (to the main program) variables you’ve initialized with different values to the
             first procedure above. Run the program and verify that it is operating correctly and that it
             is passing the parameters to each of these procedures in a reasonable fashion.
    4)       Write a program that implements the following Pascal program in assembly language.
             Assume that all program variables (including globals in the main program) are allocated
             in activation records on the stack.
             program nest3;
             var    i:integer;

                     procedure A(k:integer);

                                 procedure B(procedure c);
                                 var m:integer;
                                 begin

                                            for m:= 0 to 4 do c(m);

                                 end; {B}

                                 procedure D(n:integer);
                                 begin

                                            for i:= 0 to n-1 do writeln(i);

                                 end; {D}

                                 procedure E;
                                 begin

                                            writeln(‘A stuff:’);
                                            B(A);
                                            writeln(‘D stuff:’);
                                            B(D);

                                 end; {E}

                     begin {A}

                                 B(D);
                                 writeln;
                                 if k < 2 then E;


Page 696
                                                                             Procedures: Advanced Topics


                    end; {A}

            begin {nest3}

                    A(0);

            end; {nest3}

   5)       The program in Section 12.7.2 (Ex12_2.asm on the companion CD-ROM) uses the 80286
            enter and leave instructions to maintain the display in each activation record. As pointed
            out in Section 12.1.6, these instructions are quite slow, especially on 80486 and later pro-
            cessors. Rewrite this code by replacing the enter and leave instructions with the
            straight-line code that does the same job. In CodeView, single step through the program as
            per the second laboratory exercise (Section 12.7.2) to verify that your stack frames are
            identical to those the enter and leave instructions produce.
   6)       The generic Bubble Sort program in Section 12.7.3 only works with data objects that are
            two bytes wide. This is because the Sort procedure passes the values of Data[I] and Data[J]
            on the stack to the comparison routines (LTint and LTunsigned) and because the sort rou-
            tine multiplies the i and j indexes by two when indexing into the data array. This is a
            severe shortcoming to this generic sort routine. Rewrite the program to make it truly
            generic. Do this by writing a “CompareAndSwap” routine that will replace the LT and
            Swap calls. To CompareAndSwap you should pass the array (by reference) and the two
            array indexes (i and j) to compare and possibly swap. Write two versions of the
            CompareAndSwap routine, one for unsigned integers and one for signed integers. Run
            this program and verify that your implementation works properly.



12.9    Summary
                 Block structured languages, like Pascal, provide access to non-local variables at differ-
            ent lex levels. Accessing non-local variables is a complex task requiring special data struc-
            tures such as a static link chain or a display. The display is probably the most efficient way
            to access non-local variables. The 80286 and later processors provide special instructions,
            enter and leave for maintaining a display list, but these instructions are too slow for most
            common uses. For additional details, see
                    •   “Lexical Nesting, Static Links, and Displays” on page 639
                    •   “Scope” on page 640
                    •   “Static Links” on page 642
                    •   “Accessing Non-Local Variables Using Static Links” on page 647
                    •   “The Display” on page 648
                    •   “The 80286 ENTER and LEAVE Instructions” on page 650
                    •   “Passing Variables at Different Lex Levels as Parameters.” on page 652
                    •   “Passing Parameters as Parameters to Another Procedure” on page 655
                    •   “Passing Procedures as Parameters” on page 659
                Iterators are a cross between a function and a looping construct. They are a very pow-
            erful programming construct available in many very high level languages. Efficient imple-
            mentation of iterators involves careful manipulation of the stack at run time. To see how
            to implement iterators, read the following sections:
                    •   “Iterators” on page 663
                    •   “Implementing Iterators Using In-Line Expansion” on page 664
                    •   “Implementing Iterators with Resume Frames” on page 666
                    •   “An Example of an Iterator” on page 669
                    •   “Another Iterator Example” on page 673




                                                                                                 Page 697
Chapter 12


12.10 Questions
    1)       What is an iterator?
    2)       What is a resume frame?
    3)       How do the iterators in this chapter implement the success and failure results?
    4)       What does the stack look like when executing the body of a loop controlled by an iterator?
    5        What is a static link?
    6)       What is a display?
    7)       Describe how to access a non-local variable when using static links.
    8)       Describe how to access a non-local variable when using a display.
    9)       How would you access a non-local variable when using the display built by the 80286
             ENTER instruction?
    10)      Draw a picture of the activation record for a procedure at lex level 4 that uses the ENTER
             instruction to build the display.
    11)      Explain why the static links work better than a display when passing procedures and
             functions as parameters.
    12)      Suppose you want to pass an intermediate variable by value-result using the technique
             where you push the value before calling the procedure and then pop the value (storing it
             back into the intermediate variable) upon return from the procedure. Provide two exam-
             ples, one using static links and one using a display, that implement pass by value-result in
             this fashion.
    13)      Convert the following (pseudo) Pascal code into 80x86 assembly language. Assume Pascal
             supports pass by name and pass by lazy evaluation parameters as suggested by the fol-
             lowing code.
             program main;
             var k:integer;
             procedure one(LazyEval i:integer);
             begin
                    writeln(i);
             end;
             procedure two(name j:integer);
             begin
                    one(j);
             end;
             begin {main}
                    k := 2;
                    two(k);
             end;




Page 698
