Floating Point Arithmetic                                                              Chapter 14
                 Although integers provide an exact representation for numeric values, they suffer
             from two major drawbacks: the inability to represent fractional values and a limited
             dynamic range. Floating point arithmetic solves these two problems at the expense of
             accuracy and, on some processors, speed. Most programmers are aware of the speed loss
             associated with floating point arithmetic; however, they are blithely unware of the prob-
             lems with accuracy.
                  For many applications, the benefits of floating point outweigh the disadvantages.
             However, to properly use floating point arithmetic in any program, you must learn how
             floating point arithmetic operates. Intel, understanding the importance of floating point
             arithmetic in modern programs, provided support for floating point arithmetic in the ear-
             liest designs of the 8086 – the 80x87 FPU (floating point unit or math coprocessor). How-
             ever, on processors eariler than the 80486 (or on the 80486sx), the floating point processor
             is an optional device; it this device is not present you must simulate it in software.
                 This chapter contains four main sections. The first section discusses floating point
             arithmetic from a mathematical point of view. The second section discusses the binary
             floating point formats commonly used on Intel processors. The third discusses software
             floating point and the math routines from the UCR Standard Library. The fourth section
             discusses the 80x87 FPU chips.


14.0   Chapter Overview

                 This chapter contains four major sections: a description of floating point formats and
             operations (two sections), a discussion of the floating point support in the UCR Standard
             Library, and a discussion of the 80x87 FPU (floating point unit). The sections below that
             have a “•” prefix are essential. Those sections with a “❏” discuss advanced topics that you
             may want to put off for a while.
                     •    The mathematics of floating point arithmetic.
                     •    IEEE floating point formats.
                     •    The UCR Standard Library floating point routines.
                     •    The 80x87 floating point coprocessors.
                     •    FPU data movement instructions.
                      ❏   Conversions.
                     •    Arithmetic instructions.
                     •    Comparison instructions.
                      ❏   Constant instructiuons.
                      ❏   Transcendental instructions.
                      ❏   Miscellaneous instructions.
                      ❏   Integer operations.
                      ❏   Additional trigonometric functions.



14.1   The Mathematics of Floating Point Arithmetic
                 A big problem with floating point arithmetic is that it does not follow the standard
             rules of algebra. Nevertheless, many programmers apply normal algebraic rules when
             using floating point arithmetic. This is a source of bugs in many programs. One of the pri-
             mary goals of this section is to describe the limitations of floating point arithmetic so you
             will understand how to use it properly.
                 Normal algebraic rules apply only to infinte precision arithmetic. Consider the simple
             statement x:=x+1, x is an integer. On any modern computer this statement follows the nor-
             mal rules of algebra as long as overflow does not occur. That is, this statement is valid only for


                                                                                                     Page 771

                       Thi d         t         t d ith F      M k    402
Chapter 14




                                ±                        e±
 Figure 14.1 Simple Floating Point Format

               certain values of x (minint <= x < maxint). Most programmers do not have a problem with
               this because they are well aware of the fact that integers in a program do not follow the
               standard algebraic rules (e.g., 5/2 ≠ 2.5).
                    Integers do not follow the standard rules of algebra because the computer represents
               them with a finite number of bits. You cannot represent any of the (integer) values above
               the maximum integer or below the minimum integer. Floating point values suffer from
               this same problem, only worse. After all, the integers are a subset of the real numbers.
               Therefore, the floating point values must represent the same infinite set of integers. How-
               ever, there are an infinite number of values between any two real values, so this problem
               is infinitely worse. Therefore, as well as having to limit your values between a maximum
               and minimum range, you cannot represent all the values between those two ranges,
               either.
                   To represent real numbers, most floating point formats employ scientific notation and
               use some number of bits to represent a mantissa and a smaller number of bits to represent
               an exponent. The end result is that floating point numbers can only represent numbers
               with a specific number of significant digits. This has a big impact on how floating point
               arithmetic operations. To easily see the impact of limited precision arithmetic, we will
               adopt a simplified decimal floating point format for our examples. Our floating point for-
               mat will provide a mantissa with three significant digits and a decimal exponent with two
               digits. The mantissa and exponents are both signed values (see Figure 14.1).
                    When adding and subtracting two numbers in scientific notation, you must adjust the
               two values so that their exponents are the same. For example, when adding 1.23e1 and
               4.56e0, you must adjust the values so they have the same exponent. One way to do this is
               to to convert 4.56e0 to 0.456e1 and then add. This produces 1.686e1. Unfortunately, the
               result does not fit into three significant digits, so we must either round or truncate the
               result to three significant digits. Rounding generally produces the most accurate result, so
               let’s round the result to obtain 1.69e1. As you can see, the lack of precision (the number of
               digits or bits we maintain in a computation) affects the accuracy (the correctness of the
               computation).
                   In the previous example, we were able to round the result because we maintained four
               significant digits during the calculation. If our floating point calculation is limited to three
               significant digits during computation, we would have had to truncate the last digit of the
               smaller number, obtaining 1.68e1 which is even less correct. Extra digits available during a
               computation are known as guard digits (or guard bits in the case of a binary format). They
               greatly enhance accuracy during a long chain of computations.
                   The accuracy loss during a single computation usually isn’t enough to worry about
               unless you are greatly concerned about the accuracy of your computations. However, if
               you compute a value which is the result of a sequence of floating point operations, the
               error can accumulate and greatly affect the computation itself. For example, suppose we
               were to add 1.23e3 with 1.00e0. Adjusting the numbers so their exponents are the same
               before the addition produces 1.23e3 + 0.001e3. The sum of these two values, even after
               rounding, is 1.23e3. This might seem perfectly reasonable to you; after all, we can only
               maintain three significant digits, adding in a small value shouldn’t affect the result at all.
               However, suppose we were to add 1.00e0 1.23e3 ten times. The first time we add 1.00e0 to
               1.23e3 we get 1.23e3. Likewise, we get this same result the second, third, fourth, ..., and
               tenth time we add 1.00e0 to 1.23e3. On the other hand, had we added 1.00e0 to itself ten
               times, then added the result (1.00e1) to 1.23e3, we would have gotten a different result,
               1.24e3. This is the most important thing to know about limited precision arithmetic:


Page 772
                                                                         Floating Point Arithmetic

    The order of evaluation can effect the accuracy of the result.
    You will get more accurate results if the relative magnitudes (that is, the exponents)
are close to one another. If you are performing a chain calculation involving addition and
subtraction, you should attempt to group the values appropriately.
     Another problem with addition and subtraction is that you can wind up with false pre-
cision. Consider the computation 1.23e0 - 1.22 e0. This produces 0.01e0. Although this is
mathematically equivalent to 1.00e-2, this latter form suggests that the last two digits are
exactly zero. Unfortunately, we’ve only got a single significant digit at this time. Indeed,
some FPUs or floating point software packages might actually insert random digits (or
bits) into the L.O. positions. This brings up a second important rule concerning limited
precision arithmetic:
        Whenever subtracting two numbers with the same signs or adding two numbers
        with different signs, the accuracy of the result may be less than the precision
        available in the floating point format.
    Multiplication and division do not suffer from the same problems as addition and
subtraction since you do not have to adjust the exponents before the operation; all you
need to do is add the exponents and multiply the mantissas (or subtract the exponents
and divide the mantissas). By themselves, multiplication and division do not produce par-
ticularly poor results. However, they tend to multiply any error which already exists in a
value. For example, if you multiply 1.23e0 by two, when you should be multiplying 1.24e0
by two, the result is even less accurate. This brings up a third important rule when work-
ing with limited precision arithmetic:
        When performing a chain of calculations involving addition, subtraction, multi-
        plication, and division, try to perform the multiplication and division operations
        first.
    Often, by applying normal algebraic transformations, you can arrange a calculation so
the multiply and divide operations occur first. For example, suppose you want to com-
pute x*(y+z). Normally you would add y and z together and multiply their sum by x.
However, you will get a little more accuracy if you transform x*(y+z) to get x*y+x*z and
compute the result by performing the multiplications first.
    Multiplication and division are not without their own problems. When multiplying
two very large or very small numbers, it is quite possible for overflow or underflow to
occur. The same situation occurs when dividing a small number by a large number or
dividing a large number by a small number. This brings up a fourth rule you should
attempt to follow when multiplying or dividing values:
        When multiplying and dividing sets of numbers, try to arrange the multiplica-
        tions so that they multiply large and small numbers together; likewise, try to
        divide numbers that have the same relative magnitudes.
     Comparing floating pointer numbers is very dangerous. Given the inaccuracies
present in any computation (including converting an input string to a floating point
value), you should never compare two floating point values to see if they are equal. In a
binary floating point format, different computations which produce the same (mathemati-
cal) result may differ in their least significant bits. For example, adding 1.31e0+1.69e0
should produce 3.00e0. Likewise, adding 2.50e0+1.50e0 should produce 3.00e0. However,
were you to compare (1.31e0+1.69e0) agains (2.50e0+1.50e0) you might find out that these
sums are not equal to one another. The test for equality succeeds if and only if all bits (or
digits) in the two operands are exactly the same. Since this is not necessarily true after two
different floating point computations which should produce the same result, a straight
test for equality may not work.
     The standard way to test for equality between floating point numbers is to determine
how much error (or tolerance) you will allow in a comparison and check to see if one
value is within this error range of the other. The straight-forward way to do this is to use a
test like the following:
if Value1 >= (Value2-error) and Value1 <= (Value2+error) then …


                                                                                         Page 773
Chapter 14


                 Another common way to handle this same comparison is to use a statement of the form:
                          if abs(Value1-Value2) <= error then …

                      Most texts, when discussing floating point comparisons, stop immediately after dis-
                 cussing the problem with floating point equality, assuming that other forms of compari-
                 son are perfectly okay with floating point numbers. This isn’t true! If we are assuming that
                 x=y if x is within y±error, then a simple bitwise comparison of x and y will claim that x<y
                 if y is greater than x but less than y+error. However, in such a case x should really be
                 treated as equal to y, not less than y. Therefore, we must always compare two floating
                 point numbers using ranges, regardless of the actual comparison we want to perform. Try-
                 ing to compare two floating point numbers directly can lead to an error. To compare two
                 floating point numbers, x and y, against one another, you should use one of the following
                 forms:
                          =           if   abs(x-y) <= error then …
                          ≠           if   abs(x-y) > error then …
                          <           if   (x-y) < error then …
                          ≤           if   (x-y) <= error then …
                          >           if   (x-y) > error then …
                          ≥           if   (x-y) >= error then …

                     You must exercise care when choosing the value for error. This should be a value
                 slightly greater than the largest amount of error which will creep into your computations.
                 The exact value will depend upon the particular floating point format you use, but more
                 on that a little later. The final rule we will state in this section is
                          When comparing two floating point numbers, always compare one value to see if
                          it is in the range given by the second value plus or minus some small error value.
                     There are many other little problems that can occur when using floating point values.
                 This text can only point out some of the major problems and make you aware of the fact
                 that you cannot treat floating point arithmetic like real arithmetic – the inaccuracies
                 present in limited precision arithmetic can get you into trouble if you are not careful. A
                 good text on numerical analysis or even scientific computing can help fill in the details
                 which are beyond the scope of this text. If you are going to be working with floating point
                 arithmetic, in any language, you should take the time to study the effects of limited preci-
                 sion arithmetic on your computations.



14.2    IEEE Floating Point Formats
                      When Intel planned to introduce a floating point coprocessor for their new 8086
                 microprocessor, they were smart enough to realize that the electrical engineers and
                 solid-state physicists who design chips were, perhaps, not the best people to do the neces-
                 sary numerical analysis to pick the best possible binary representation for a floating point
                 format. So Intel went out and hired the best numerical analyst they could find to design a
                 floating point format for their 8087 FPU. That person then hired two other experts in the
                 field and the three of them (Kahn, Coonan, and Stone) designed Intel’s floating point for-
                 mat. They did such a good job designing the KCS Floating Point Standard that the IEEE
                 organization adopted this format for the IEEE floating point format1.
                      To handle a wide range of performance and accuracy requirements, Intel actually
                 introduced three floating point formats: single precision, double precision, and extended
                 precision. The single and double precision formats corresponded to C’s float and double
                 types or FORTRAN’s real and double precision types. Intel intended to use extended pre-
                 cision for long chains of computations. Extended precision contains 16 extra bits that the



    1. There were some minor changes to the way certain degenerate operations were handled, but the bit representa-
    tion remained essentially unchanged.


Page 774
                                                                                         Floating Point Arithmetic



         31                     23                      15                      7                   0


         Sign   Exponent Bits     1                            Mantissa Bits
          Bit
                                 The 24th mantissa bit is
                                 implied and is always one.

Figure 14.2 32 Bit Single Precision Floating Point Format

                calculations could use for guard bits before rounding down to a double precision value
                when storing the result.
                     The single precision format uses a one’s complement 24 bit mantissa and an eight bit
                excess-128 exponent. The mantissa usually represents a value between 1.0 to just under
                2.0. The H.O. bit of the mantissa is always assumed to be one and represents a value just to
                the left of the binary point2. The remaining 23 mantissa bits appear to the right of the
                binary point. Therefore, the mantissa represents the value:
                                      1.mmmmmmm mmmmmmmm mmmmmmmm

                The “mmmm…” characters represent the 23 bits of the mantissa. Keep in mind that we are
                working with binary numbers here. Therefore, each position to the right of the binary
                point represents a value (zero or one) times a successive negative power of two. The
                implied one bit is always multiplied by 20, which is one. This is why the mantissa is
                always greater than or equal to one. Even if the other mantissa bits are all zero, the
                implied one bit always gives us the value one3. Of course, even if we had an almost infi-
                nite number of one bits after the binary point, they still would not add up to two. This is
                why the mantissa can represent values in the range one to just under two.
                    Although there are an infinite number of values between one and two, we can only
                represent eight million of them because we a 23 bit mantissa (the 24th bit is always one).
                This is the reason for inaccuracy in floating point arithmetic – we are limited to 23 bits of
                precision in compuations involving single precision floating point values.
                     The mantissa uses a one’s complement format rather than two’s complement. This
                means that the 24 bit value of the mantissa is simply an unsigned binary number and the
                sign bit determines whether that value is positive or negative. One’s complement num-
                bers have the unusual property that there are two representations for zero (with the sign
                bit set or clear). Generally, this is important only to the person designing the floating point
                software or hardware system. We will assume that the value zero always has the sign bit
                clear.
                    To represent values outside the range 1.0 to just under 2.0, the exponent portion of the
                floating point format comes into play. The floating point format raise two to the power
                specified by the exponent and then multiplies the mantissa by this value. The exponent is
                eight bits and is stored in an excess-127 format. In excess-127 format, the exponent 20 is
                represented by the value 127 (7fh). Therefore, to convert an exponent to excess-127 format
                simply add 127 to the exponent value. The use of excess-127 format makes it easier to
                compare floating point values. The single precision floating point format takes the form
                shown in Figure 14.2.
                    With a 24 bit mantissa, you will get approximately 6-1/2 digits of precision (one half
                digit of precision means that the first six digits can all be in the range 0..9 but the seventh
                digit can only be in the range 0..x where x<9 and is generally close to five). With an eight



  2. The binary point is the same thing as the decimal point except it appears in binary numbers rather than decimal
  numbers.
  3. Actually, this isn’t necessarily true. Thye IEEE floating point format supports denormalized values where the
  H.O. bit is not zero. However, we will ignore denormalized values in our discussion.


                                                                                                          Page 775
Chapter 14



             63                       52                                                7          0

                         …                                              …
             Sign     Exponent Bits    1                                Mantissa Bits
              Bit
                                           The 53rd mantissa bit is
                                           implied and is always one.

 Figure 14.3 64 Bit Double Precision Floating Point Format



             79                       64                                                7          0

                         …                                              …
             Sign     Exponent Bits                              Mantissa Bits
              Bit

 Figure 14.4 80 Bit Extended Precision Floating Point Format

                    bit excess-128 exponent, the dynamic range of single precision floating point numbers is
                    approximately 2±128 or about 10±38.
                         Although single precision floating point numbers are perfectly suitable for many
                    applications, the dynamic range is somewhat small for many scientific applications and
                    the very limited precision is unsuitable for many financial, scientific, and other applica-
                    tions. Furthermore, in long chains of computations, the limited precision of the single pre-
                    cision format may introduce serious error.
                        The double precision format helps overcome the problems of single preicision floating
                    point. Using twice the space, the double precision format has an 11-bit excess-1023 expo-
                    nent and a 53 bit mantissa (with an implied H.O. bit of one) plus a sign bit. This provides
                    a dynamic range of about 10±308and 14-1/2 digits of precision, sufficient for most applica-
                    tions. Double precision floating point values take the form shown in Figure 14.3.
                        In order to help ensure accuracy during long chains of computations involving dou-
                    ble precision floating point numbers, Intel designed the extended precision format. The
                    extended precision format uses 80 bits. Twelve of the additional 16 bits are appended to
                    the mantissa, four of the additional bits are appended to the end of the exponent. Unlike
                    the single and double precision values, the extended precision format does not have an
                    implied H.O. bit which is always one. Therefore, the extended precision format provides a
                    64 bit mantissa, a 15 bit excess-16383 exponent, and a one bit sign. The format for the
                    extended precision floating point value is shown in Figure 14.4.
                         On the 80x87 FPUs and the 80486 CPU, all computations are done using the extended
                    precision form. Whenever you load a single or double precision value, the FPU automati-
                    cally converts it to an extended precision value. Likewise, when you store a single or dou-
                    ble precision value to memory, the FPU automatically rounds the value down to the
                    appropriate size before storing it. By always working with the extended precision format,
                    Intel guarantees a large number of guard bits are present to ensure the accuracy of your
                    computations. Some texts erroneously claim that you should never use the extended pre-
                    cision format in your own programs, because Intel only guarantees accurate computations
                    when using the single or double precision formats. This is foolish. By performing all com-
                    putations using 80 bits, Intel helps ensure (but not guarantee) that you will get full 32 or
                    64 bit accuracy in your computations. Since the 80x87 FPUs and 80486 CPU do not pro-
                    vide a large number of guard bits in 80 bit computations, some error will inevitably creep
                    into the L.O. bits of an extended precision computation. However, if your computation is
                    correct to 64 bits, the 80 bit computation will always provide at least 64 accurate bits. Most
                    of the time you will get even more. While you cannot assume that you get an accurate 80


Page 776
                                                                                    Floating Point Arithmetic

                bit computation, you can usually do better than 64 when using the extended precision for-
                mat.
                     To maintain maximum precision during computation, most computations use normal-
                ized values. A normalized floating point value is one that has a H.O. mantissa bit equal to
                one. Almost any non-normalized value can be normalized by shifting the mantissa bits to
                the left and decrementing the exponent by one until a one appears in the H.O. bit of the
                mantissa. Remember, the exponent is a binary exponent. Each time you increment the
                exponent, you multiply the floating point value by two. Likewise, whenever you decre-
                ment the exponent, you divide the floating point value by two. By the same token, shifting
                the mantissa to the left one bit position multiplies the floating point value by two; like-
                wise, shifting the mantissa to the right divides the floating point value by two. Therefore,
                shifting the mantissa to the left one position and decrementing the exponent does not
                change the value of the floating point number at all.
                    Keeping floating point numbers normalized is beneficial because it maintains the
                maximum number of bits of precision for a computation. If the H.O. bits of the mantissa
                are all zero, the mantissa has that many fewer bits of precision available for computation.
                Therefore, a floating point computation will be more accurate if it involves only normal-
                ized values.
                    There are two important cases where a floating point number cannot be normalized.
                The value 0.0 is a special case. Obviously it cannot be normalized because the floating
                point representation for zero has no one bits in the mantissa. This, however, is not a prob-
                lem since we can exactly represent the value zero with only a single bit.
                    The second case is when we have some H.O. bits in the mantissa which are zero but
                the biased exponent is also zero (and we cannot decrement it to normalize the mantissa).
                Rather than disallow certain small values, whose H.O. mantissa bits and biased exponent
                are zero (the most negative exponent possible), the IEEE standard allows special
                denormalized values to represent these smaller values4. Although the use of denormalized
                values allows IEEE floating point computations to produce better results than if under-
                flow occurred, keep in mind that denormalized values offer less bits of precision and are
                inherently less accurate.
                     Since the 80x87 FPUs and 80486 CPU always convert single and double precision val-
                ues to extended precision, extended precision arithmetic is actually faster than single or
                double precision. Therefore, the expected performance benefit of using the smaller for-
                mats is not present on these chips. However, when designing the Pentium/586 CPU, Intel
                redesigned the built-in floating point unit to better compete with RISC chips. Most RISC
                chips support a native 64 bit double precision format which is faster than Intel’s extended
                precision format. Therefore, Intel provided native 64 bit operations on the Pentium to bet-
                ter compete against the RISC chips. Therefore, the double precision format is the fastest on
                the Pentium and later chips.



14.3   The UCR Standard Library Floating Point Routines
                    In most assembly language texts, which bother to cover floating point arithmetic, this
                section would normally describe how to design your own floating point routines for addi-
                tion, subtraction, multiplication, and division. This text will not do that for several rea-
                sons. First, to design a good floating point library requires a solid background in numerical
                analysis; a prerequisite this text does not assume of its readers. Second, the UCR Standard
                Library already provides a reasonable set of floating point routines in source code form;
                why waste space in this text when the sources are readily available elsewhere? Third,
                floating point units are quickly becoming standard equipment on all modern CPUs or
                motherboards; it makes no more sense to describe how to manually perform a floating
                point computation than it does to describe how to manually perform an integer computa-
                tion. Therefore, this section will describe how to use the UCR Standard Library routines if

   4. The alternative would be to underflow the values to zero.


                                                                                                    Page 777
Chapter 14

                 you do not have an FPU available; a later section will describe the use of the floating point
                 unit.
                      The UCR Standard Library provides a large number of routines to support floating
                 point computation and I/O. This library uses the same memory format for 32, 64, and 80
                 bit floating point numbers as the 80x87 FPUs. The UCR Standard Library’s floating point
                 routines do not exactly follow the IEEE requirements with respect to error conditions and
                 other degenerate cases, and it may produce slightly different results than an 80x87 FPU,
                 but the results will be very close5. Since the UCR Standard Library uses the same memory
                 format for 32, 64, and 80 bit numbers as the 80x87 FPUs, you can freely mix computations
                 involving floating point between the FPU and the Standard Library routines.
                    The UCR Standard Library provides numerous routines to manipulate floating point
                 numbes. The following sections describe each of these routines, by category.



14.3.1       Load and Store Routines
                      Since 80x86 CPUs without an FPU do not provide any 80-bit registers, the UCR Stan-
                 dard Library must use memory-based variables to hold floating point values during com-
                 putation. The UCR Standard Library routines use two pseudo registers, an accumlator
                 register and an operand register, when performing floating point operations. For example,
                 the floating point addition routine adds the value in the floating point operand register to
                 the floating point accumulator register, leaving the result in the accumulator. The load and
                 store routines allow you to load floating point values into the floating point accumulator
                 and operand registers as well as store the value of the floating point accumulator back to
                 memory. The routines in this category include accop, xaccop, lsfpa, ssfpa, ldfpa, sdfpa, lefpa,
                 sefpa, lefpal, lsfpo, ldfpo, lefpo, and lefpol.
                     The accop routine copies the value in the floating point accumulator to the floating
                 point operand register. This routine is useful when you want to use the result of one com-
                 putation as the second operand of a second computation.
                     The xaccop routine exchanges the values in the floating point accumuator and oper-
                 and registers. Note that many floating point computations destory the value in the float-
                 ing point operand register, so you cannot blindly assume that the routines preserve the
                 operand register. Therefore, calling this routine only makes sense after performing some
                 computation which you know does not affect the floating point operand register.
                     Lsfpa, ldfpa, and lefpa load the floating point accumulator with a single, double, or
                 extended precision floating point value, respectively. The UCR Standard Library uses its
                 own internal format for computations. These routines convert the specified values to the
                 internal format during the load. On entry to each of these routines, es:di must contain the
                 address of the variable you want to load into the floating point accumulator. The follow-
                 ing code demonstrates how to call these routines:
                 rVar                   real4       1.0
                 drVar                  real8       2.0
                 xrVar                  real10      3.0
                                          .
                                          .
                                          .
                                        lesi        rVar
                                        lsfpa
                                          .
                                          .
                                          .
                                        lesi        drVar
                                        ldfpa
                                          .
                                          .
                                          .




    5. Note, by the way, that different floating point chips, especially across different CPU lines, but even within the
    Intel family, produce slightly different results. So the fact that the UCR Standard Library does not produce the
    exact same results as a particular FPU is not that important.


Page 778
                                                                                        Floating Point Arithmetic

                                  lesi        xrVar
                                  lefpa
                The lsfpo, ldfpo, and lefpo routines are similar to the lsfpa, ldfpa, and lefpa routines
            except, of course, they load the floating point operand register rather than the floating
            point accumulator with the value at address es:di.
                Lefpal and lefpol load the floating point accumulator or operand register with a literal
            80 bit floating point constant appearing in the code stream. To use these two routines, sim-
            ply follow the call with a real10 directive and the appropriate constant, e.g.,
                                  lefpal
                                  real10      1.0
                                  lefpol
                                  real10      2.0e5
                 The ssfpa, sdfpa, and sefpa routines store the value in the floating point accumulator
            into the memory based floating point variable whose address appears in es:di. There are
            no corresponding ssfpo, sdfpo, or sefpo routines because a result you would want to store
            should never appear in the floating point operand register. If you happen to get a value in
            the floating point operand that you want to store into memory, simply use the xaccop rou-
            tine to swap the accumulator and operand registers, then use the store accumulator rou-
            tines to save the result. The following code demonstrates the use of these routines:
            rVar                  real4        1.0
            drVar                 real8        2.0
            xrVar                 real10       3.0
                                    .
                                    .
                                    .
                                  lesi        rVar
                                  ssfpa
                                    .
                                    .
                                    .
                                  lesi        drVar
                                  sdfpa
                                    .
                                    .
                                    .
                                  lesi        xrVar
                                  sefpa



14.3.2   Integer/Floating Point Conversion
                 The UCR Standard Library includes several routines to convert between binary inte-
            gers and floating point values. These routines are itof, utof, ltof, ultof, ftoi, ftou, ftol, and ftoul.
            The first four routines convert signed and unsigned integers to floating point format, the
            last four routines truncate floating point values and convert them to an integer value.
                 Itof converts the signed 16-bit value in ax to a floating point value and leaves the result
            in the floating point accumulator. This routine does not affect the floating point operand
            register. Utof converts the unsigned integer in ax in a similar fashion. Ltof and ultof convert
            the 32 bit signed (ltof) or unsigned (ultof) integer in dx:ax to a floating point value, leaving
            the value in the floating point accumulator. These routines always succeed.
                Ftoi converts the value in the floating point accumulator to a signed integer value,
            leaving the result in ax. Conversion is by truncation; this routine keeps the integer portion
            and throws away the fractional part. If an overflow occurs because the resulting integer
            portion does not fit into 16 bits, ftoi returns the carry flag set. If the conversion occurs with-
            out error, ftoi return the carry flag clear. Ftou works in a similar fashion, except it converts
            the floating point value to an unsigned integer in ax; it returns the carry set if the floating
            point value was negative.
                Ftol and ftoul converts the value in the floating point accumulator to a 32 bit integer
            leaving the result in dx:ax. Ftol works on signed values, ftoul works with unsigned values.
            As with ftoi and ftou, these routines return the carry flag set if a conversion error occurs.



                                                                                                          Page 779
Chapter 14


14.3.3       Floating Point Arithmetic
                     Floating point arithmetic is handled by the fpadd, fp sub, fpcmp, fpmul, and fpdiv rou-
                tines. Fpadd adds the value in the floating point accumulator to the floating point accumu-
                lator. Fpsub subtracts the value in the floating point operand from the floating point
                accumulator. Fpmul multiplies the value in the floating accumulator by the floating point
                operand. Fpdiv divides the value in the floating point accumulator by the value in the
                floating point operand register. Fpcmp compares the value in the floating point accumula-
                tor against the floating point operand.
                     The UCR Standard Library arithmetic routines do very little error checking. For exam-
                ple, if arithmetic overflow occurs during addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division,
                the Standard Library simply sets the result to the largest legal value and returns. This is
                one of the major deviations from the IEEE floating point standard. Likewise, when under-
                flow occurs the routines simply set the result to zero and return. If you divide any value
                by zero, the Standard Library routines simply set the result to the largest possible value
                and return. You may need to modify the standard library routines if you need to check for
                overflow, underflow, or division by zero in your programs.
                     The floating point comparison routine (fpcmp) compares the floating point accumula-
                tor against the floating point operand and returns -1, 0, or 1 in the ax register if the accu-
                mulator is less than, equal, or greater than the floating point operand. It also compares ax
                with zero immediately before returning so it sets the flags so you can use the jg, jge, jl, jle,
                je, and jne instructions immediately after calling fpcmp. Unlike fpadd, fpsub, fpmul, and fpdiv,
                fpcmp does not destroy the value in the floating point accumulator or the floating point
                operand register. Keep in mind the problems associated with comparing floating point
                numbers!



14.3.4       Float/Text Conversion and Printff
                    The UCR Standard Library provides three routines, ftoa, etoa, and atof, that let you
                convert floating point numbers to ASCII strings and vice versa; it also provides a special
                version of printf, printff, that includes the ability to print floating point values as well as
                other data types.
                     Ftoa converts a floating point number to an ASCII string which is a decimal represen-
                tation of that floating point number. On entry, the floating point accumulator contains the
                number you want to convert to a string. The es:di register pair points at a buffer in mem-
                ory where ftoa will store the string. The al register contains the field width (number of
                print positions). The ah register contains the number of positions to display to the right of
                the decimal point. If ftoa cannot display the number using the print format specified by al
                and ah, it will create a string of “#” characters, ah characters long. Es:di must point at a
                byte array containing at least al+1 characters and al should contain at least five. The field
                width and decimal length values in the al and ah registers are similar to the values
                appearing after floating point numbers in the Pascal write statement, e.g.,
                                    write(floatVal:al:ah);
                     Etoa outputs the floating point number in exponential form. As with ftoa, es:di points
                at the buffer where etoa will store the result. The al register must contain at least eight and
                is the field width for the number. If al contains less than eight, etoa will output a string of
                “#” characters. The string that es:di points at must contain at least al+1 characters. This
                conversion routine is similar to Pascal’s write procedure when writing real values with a
                single field width specification:
                                    write(realvar:al);
                    The Standard Library printff routine provides all the facilities of the standard printf
                routine plus the ability to handle floating point output. The printff routine includes sev-



Page 780
                                                                                          Floating Point Arithmetic

                eral new format specifications to print floating point numbers in decimal form or using
                scientific notation. The specifications are
                         •   %x.yF         Prints a 32 bit floating point number in decimal form.
                         •   %x.yGF        Prints a 64 bit floating point number in decimal form.
                         •   %x.yLF        Prints an 80 bit floating point number in decimal form.
                         •   %zE           Prints a 32 bit floating point number using scientific notation.
                         •   %zGE          Prints a 64 bit floating point number using scientific notation.
                         •   %zLE          Prints an 80 bit floating point value using scientific notation.
                In the format strings above, x and z are integer constants that denote the field width of the
                number to print. The y item is also an integer constant that specifies the number of posi-
                tions to print after the decimal point. The x.y values are comparable to the values passed
                to ftoa in al and ah. The z value is comparable to the value etoa expects in the al register.
                     Other than the addition of these six new formats, the printff routine is identical to the
                printf routine. If you use the printff routine in your assembly language programs, you
                should not use the printf routine as well. Printff duplicates all the facilities of printf and using
                both would only waste memory.



14.4     The 80x87 Floating Point Coprocessors
                     When the 8086 CPU first appeared in the late 1970’s, semiconductor technology was
                not to the point where Intel could put floating point instrutions directly on the 8086 CPU.
                Therefore, they devised a scheme whereby they could use a second chip to perform the
                floating point calculations – the floating point unit (or FPU)6. They released their original
                floating point chip, the 8087, in 1980. This particular FPU worked with the 8086, 8088,
                80186, and 80188 CPUs. When Intel introduced the 80286 CPU, they released a redesigned
                80287 FPU chip to accompany it. Although the 80287 was compatible with the 80386 CPU,
                Intel designed a better FPU, the 80387, for use in 80386 systems. The 80486 CPU was the
                first Intel CPU to include an on-chip floating point unit. Shortly after the release of the
                80486, Intel introduced the 80486sx CPU that was an 80486 without the built-in FPU. To
                get floating point capabilities on this chip, you had to add an 80487 chip, although the
                80487 was really nothing more than a full-blown 80486 which took over for the “sx” chip
                in the system. Intel’s Pentium/586 chips provide a high-performance floating point unit
                directly on the CPU. There is no floating point coprocessor available for the Pentium chip.
                    Collectively, we will refer to all these chips as the 80x87 FPU. Given the obsolesence of
                the 8086, 80286, 8087, and 80287 chips, this text will concentrate on the 80387 and later
                chips. There are some differences between the 80387/80486/Pentium floating point units
                and the earlier FPUs. If you need to write code that will execute on those earlier machines,
                you should consult the appropriate Intel documentation for those devices.



14.4.1     FPU Registers
                    The 80x87 FPUs add 13 registers to the 80386 and later processors: eight floating point
                data registers, a control register, a status register, a tag register, an instruction pointer, and
                a data pointer. The data registers are similar to the 80x86’s general purpose register set
                insofar as all floating point calculations take place in these registers. The control register
                contains bits that let you decide how the 80x87 handles certain degenerate cases like
                rounding of inaccurate computations, control precision, and so on. The status register is
                similar to the 80x86’s flags register; it contains the condition code bits and several other
                floating point flags that describe the state of the 80x87 chip. The tag register contains sev-
                eral groups of bits that determine the state of the value in each of the eight general pur-
                pose registers. The instruction and data pointer registers contain certain state information

   6. Intel has also refered to this device as the Numeric Data Processor (NDP), Numeric Processor Extension (NPX),
   and math coprocessor.


                                                                                                          Page 781
Chapter 14



                79                     64                                                                0
        st(0)
        st(1)
        st(2)
        st(3)
        st(4)
        st(5)
        st(6)
        st(7)

 Figure 14.5 80x87 Floating Point Register Stack

                     about the last floating point instruction executed. We will not consider the last three regis-
                     ters in this text, see the Intel documentation for more details.



14.4.1.1 The FPU Data Registers
                          The 80x87 FPUs provide eight 80 bit data registers organized as a stack. This is a sig-
                     nificant departure from the organization of the general purpose registers on the 80x86
                     CPU that comprise a standard general-purpose register set. Intel refers to these registers
                     as ST(0), ST(1), …, ST(7). Most assemblers will accept ST as an abbreviation for ST(0).
                          The biggest difference between the FPU register set and the 80x86 register set is the
                     stack organization. On the 80x86 CPU, the ax register is always the ax register, no matter
                     what happens. On the 80x87, however, the register set is an eight element stack of 80 bit
                     floating point values (see Figure 14.5). ST(0) refers to the item on the top of the stack, ST(1)
                     refers to the next item on the stack, and so on. Many floating point instructions push and
                     pop items on the stack; therefore, ST(1) will refer to the previous contents of ST(0) after
                     you push something onto the stack. It will take some thought and practice to get used to
                     the fact that the registers are changing under you, but this is an easy problem to overcome.



14.4.1.2 The FPU Control Register
                          When Intel designed the 80x87 (and, essentially, the IEEE floating point standard),
                     there were no standards in floating point hardware. Different (mainframe and mini) com-
                     puter manufacturers all had different and incompatible floating point formats. Unfortu-
                     nately, much application software had been written taking into account the idiosyncrasies
                     of these different floating point formats. Intel wanted to designed an FPU that could work
                     with the majority of the software out there (keep in mind, the IBM PC was three to four
                     years away when Intel began designing the 8087, they couldn’t rely on that “mountain” of
                     software available for the PC to make their chip popular). Unfortunately, many of the fea-
                     tures found in these older floating point formats were mutually exclusive. For example, in
                     some floating point systems rounding would occur when there was insufficient precision;
                     in others, truncation would occur. Some applications would work with one floating point
                     system but not with the other. Intel wanted as many applications as possible to work with
                     as few changes as possible on their 80x87 FPUs, so they added a special register, the FPU
                     control register, that lets the user choose one of several possible operating modes for the
                     80x87.
                         The 80x87 control register contains 16 bits organized as shown in Figure 14.6.
                          Bit 12 of the control register is only present on the 8087 and 80287 chips. It controls
                     how the 80x87 responds to infinity. The 80387 and later chips always use a form of
                     infinitly known and affine closure because this is the only form supported by the IEEE

Page 782
                                                                                   Floating Point Arithmetic



                                  Rounding Precision
                                   Control  Control                     Exception Masks
         15                       11 10 9         8                 5   4   3     2     1    0




        00 - To nearest or even                   00 - 24 bits
        01 - Round down                           01 - reserved
        10 - Round up                             10 - 53 bits
        11 - Truncate result                      11 - 64 bits


                                          Precision
                                          Underflow
                                          Overflow
                   Reserved on 80387
                                          Zero Divide
                   and later FPUs.
                                          Denormalized
                                          Invalid Operation

Figure 14.6 80x87 Control Register

              754/854 standards. As such, we will ignore any further use of this bit and assume that it is
              always programmed with a one.
                   Bits 10 and 11 provide rounding control according to the following values:

                                     Table 58: Rounding Control
                             Bits 10 & 11      Function
                             00                To nearest or even
                             01                Round down
                             10                Round up
                             11                Truncate

                  The “00” setting is the default. The 80x87 rounds values above one-half of the least
              significant bit up. It rounds values below one-half of the least significant bit down. If the
              value below the least significant bit is exactly one-half the least significant bit, the 80x87
              rounds the value towards the value whose least significant bit is zero. For long strings of
              computations, this provides a reasonable, automatic, way to maintain maximum preci-
              sion.
                  The round up and round down options are present for those computations where it is
              important to keep track of the accuracy during a computation. By setting the rounding
              control to round down and performing the operation, the repeating the operation with the
              rounding control set to round up, you can determine the minimum and maximum ranges
              between which the true result will fall.
                  The truncate option forces all computations to truncate any excess bits during the
              computation. You will rarely use this option if accuracy is important to you. However, if
              you are porting older software to the 80x87, you might use this option to help when port-
              ing the software.
                  Bits eight and nine of the control register control the precision during computation.
              This capability is provided mainly to allow compatbility with older software as required
              by the IEEE 754 standard. The precision control bits use the following values:




                                                                                                   Page 783
Chapter 14



                          Table 59: Mantissa Precision Control Bits
                               Bits 8 & 9       Precision Control
                               00               24 bits
                               01               Reserved
                               10               53 bits
                               11               64 bits

                 For modern applications, the precision control bits should always be set to “11” to
             obtain 64 bits of precision. This will produce the most accurate results during numerical
             computation.
                  Bits zero through five are the exception masks. These are similar to the interrupt enable
             bit in the 80x86’s flags register. If these bits contain a one, the corresponding condition is
             ignored by the 80x87 FPU. However, if any bit contains zero, and the corresponding con-
             dition occurs, then the FPU immediately generates an interrupt so the program can han-
             dle the degenerate condition.
                 Bit zero corresponds to an invalid operation error. This generally occurs as the result
             of a programming error. Problem which raise the invalid operation exception include
             pushing more than eight items onto the stack or attempting to pop an item off an empty
             stack, taking the square root of a negative number, or loading a non-empty register.
                  Bit one masks the denormalized interrupt which occurs whenever you try to manipu-
             late denormalized values. Denormalized values generally occur when you load arbitrary
             extended precision values into the FPU or work with very small numbers just beyond the
             range of the FPU’s capabilities. Normally, you would probably not enable this exception.
                 Bit two masks the zero divide exception. If this bit contains zero, the FPU will generate
             an interrupt if you attempt to divide a nonzero value by zero. If you do not enable the zero
             division exception, the FPU will produce NaN (not a number) whenever you perform a
             zero division.
                 Bit three masks the overflow exception. The FPU will raise the overflow exception if a
             calculation overflows or if you attempt to store a value which is too large to fit into a des-
             tination operand (e.g., storing a large extended precision value into a single precision vari-
             able).
                 Bit four, if set, masks the underflow exception. Underflow occurs when the result is too
             small to fit in the desintation operand. Like overflow, this exception can occur whenever
             you store a small extended precision value into a smaller variable (single or double preci-
             sion) or when the result of a computation is too small for extended precision.
                  Bit five controls whether the precision exception can occur. A precision exception
             occurs whenever the FPU produces an imprecise result, generally the result of an internal
             rounding operation. Although many operations will produce an exact result, many more
             will not. For example, dividing one by ten will produce an inexact result. Therefore, this
             bit is usually one since inexact results are very common.
                 Bits six and thirteen through fifteen in the control register are currently undefined and
             reserved for future use. Bit seven is the interrupt enable mask, but it is only active on the
             8087 FPU; a zero in this bit enables 8087 interrupts and a one disables FPU interrupts.
                 The 80x87 provides two instructions, FLDCW (load control word) and FSTCW (store
             control word), that let you load and store the contents of the control register. The single
             operand to these instructions must be a 16 bit memory location. The FLDCW instruction
             loads the control register from the specified memory location, FSTCW stores the control
             register into the specified memory location.




Page 784
                                                                                           Floating Point Arithmetic



                                                                          Exception Flags
         15      14 13 12 11 10               9     8     7    6     5      4   3      2     1     0



         Busy    C3     Top of stack    C2    C1    C0
                          Pointer



                         Condition Codes
                                        Exception Flag
                                        Stack Fault
                                        Precision
                                        Underflow
                                        Overflow
                      Reserved on 80387
                                        Zero Divide
                      and later FPUs.
                                        Denormalized
                                        Invalid Operation

Figure 14.7 FPU Status Register



14.4.1.3 The FPU Status Register
                    The FPU status register provides the status of the coprocessor at the instant you read
                it. The FSTSW instruction stores the16 bit floating point status register into the
                mod/reg/rm operand. The status register s a 16 bit register, its layout appears in
                Figure 14.7.
                    Bits zero through five are the exception flags. These bits are appear in the same order
                as the exception masks in the control register. If the corresponding condition exists, then
                the bit is set. These bits are independent of the exception masks in the control register. The
                80x87 sets and clears these bits regardless of the corresponding mask setting.
                    Bit six (active only on 80386 and later processors) indicates a stack fault. A stack fault
                occurs whenever there is a stack overflow or underflow. When this bit is set, the C1 condi-
                tion code bit determines whether there was a stack overflow (C1=1) or stack underflow
                (C1=0) condition.
                    Bit seven of the status register is set if any error condition bit is set. It is the logical OR
                of bits zero through five. A program can test this bit to quickly determine if an error condi-
                tion exists.
                    Bits eight, nine, ten, and fourteen are the coprocessor condition code bits. Various
                instructions set the condition code bits as shown in the following table:



                                  Table 60: FPU Condition Code Bits
       Instruction         Condition Code Bits                           Condition
                           C3          C2          C1          C0
       fcom, fcomp,        0           0           X           0         ST > source
       fcompp,
                           0           0           X           1         ST < source
       ficom,
       ficomp              1           0           X           0         ST = source
                           1           1           X           1         ST or source undefined
                           X = Don’t care


                                                                                                           Page 785
Chapter 14

                               Table 60: FPU Condition Code Bits
           Instruction   Condition Code Bits              Condition
                         C3        C2          C1   C0
           ftst          0          0          X    0     ST is positive
                         0          0          X    1     ST is negative
                         1          0          X    0     ST is zero (+ or -)
                         1          1          X    1     ST is uncomparable
           fxam          0          0          0    0     + Unnormalized
                         0          0          1    0     -Unnormalized
                         0          1          0    0     +Normalized
                         0          1          1    0     -Normalized
                         1          0          0    0     +0
                         1          0          1    0     -0
                         1          1          0    0     +Denormalized
                         1          1          1    0     -Denormalized
                         0          0          0    1     +NaN
                         0          0          1    1     -NaN
                         0          1          0    1     +Infinity
                         0          1          1    1     -Infinity
                         1          X          X    1     Empty register
           fucom,        0          0          X    0     ST > source
           fucomp,
                         0          0          X    1     ST < source
           fucompp
                         1          0          X    0     ST = source
                         1          1          X    1     Unorder
                         X = Don’t care




Page 786
                                                                           Floating Point Arithmetic



                          Table 61: Condition Code Interpretation
Insruction(s)     C0                 C3                 C2                 C1
fcom, fcomp,                                                               Result of com-
fcmpp, ftst,                                                               parison (see
                  Result of          Result of          Operand is not
fucom,                                                                     table above) or
                  comparison.        comparison.        comparable.
fucomp,                                                                    stack over-
fucompp,          See table above.   See table above.                      flow/underflow
ficom,                                                                     (if stack excep-
ficomp                                                                     tion bit is set ).
fxam              See previous       See previous       See previous       Sign of result, or
                  table.             table.             table.             stack over-
                                                                           flow/underflow
                                                                           (if stack excep-
                                                                           tion bit is set ).
fprem,            Bit 2 of remain-   Bit 0 of remain-   0- reduction       Bit 1 of remain-
fprem1            der                der                done.              der or stack over-
                                                                           flow/underflow
                                                        1- reduction
                                                                           (if stack excep-
                                                        incomplete.
                                                                           tion bit is set ).
fist, fbstp,                                                               Round up
frndint, fst,                                                              occurred or stack
fstp, fadd,                                                                overflow/under-
fmul, fdiv,                                                                flow (if stack
fdivr, fsub,      Undefined          Undefined          Undefined          exception bit is
fsubr, fscale,                                                             set ).
fsqrt, fpatan,
f2xm1, fyl2x,
fyl2xp1
fptan, fsin,                                            0- reduction       Round up
fcos, fsincos                                           done.              occurred or stack
                  Undefined          Undefined
                                                        1- reduction       overflow/under-
                                                        incomplete.        flow (if stack
                                                                           exception bit is
                                                                           set ).
fchs, fabs,
fxch, fincstp,
                                                                           Zero result or
fdecstp,
                                                                           stack over-
constant loads    Undefined          Undefined          Undefined
                                                                           flow/underflow
, fxtract, fld,
                                                                           (if stack excep-
fild, fbld,
                                                                           tion bit is set ).
fstp (80 bit)
fldenv, fstor     Restored from      Restored from      Restored from      Restored from
                  memory oper-       memory oper-       memory oper-       memory oper-
                  and.               and.               and.               and.
fldcw,
fstenv,
                  Undefined          Undefined          Undefined          Undefined
fstcw, fstsw,
fclex
finit, fsave      Cleared to zero.   Cleared to zero.   Cleared to zero.   Cleared to zero.




                                                                                           Page 787
Chapter 14



             31                     23                           15            7                  0



             32 bit Single Precision Floating Point Format

             63                     52                                          7                  0

                         …                                            …

             64 bit Double Precision Floating Point Format

             79                     64                                          7                  0

                         …                                            …

             80 bit Extended Precision Floating Point Format

 Figure 14.8 80x87 Floating Point Formats



             15                      7                       0


             16 Bit Two's Complement Integer

             31                     23                           15            7                   0


             32 bit Two's Complement Integer


             63                     52                                          7                 0
                         …                                            …

             64 bit Two's Complement Integer

 Figure 14.9 80x87 Integer Formats

                       Bits 11-13 of the FPU status register provide the register number of the top of stack.
                   During computations, the 80x87 adds (modulo eight) the logical register numbers sup-
                   plied by the programmer to these three bits to determine the physical register number at
                   run time.
                      Bit 15 of the status register is the busy bit. It is set whenever the FPU is busy. Most pro-
                   grams will have little reason to access this bit.



14.4.2        FPU Data Types
                       The 80x87 FPU supports seven different data types: three integer types, a packed dec-
                   imal type, and three floating point types. Since the 80x86 CPUs already support integer
                   data types, these are few reasons why you would want to use the 80x87 integer types. The
                   packed decimal type provides a 17 digit signed decimal (BCD) integer. However, we are
                   avoiding BCD arithmetic in this text, so we will ignore this data type in the 80x87 FPU.
                   The remaining three data types are the 32 bit, 64 bit, and 80 bit floating point data types
                   we’ve looked at so far. The 80x87 data types appear in Figure 14.8, Figure 14.9, and
                   Figure 14.10.


Page 788
                                                                                     Floating Point Arithmetic



    79                    72     68         64          60                   7         4           0
                                                               …
     Sign Unused   D 17        D16        D15       D14                 D2        D1          D0

    80 Bit Packed Decimal Integer (BCD)

Figure 14.10 80x87 Packed Decimal Formats

                  The 80x87 FPU generally stores values in a normalized format. When a floating point
              number is normalized, the H.O. bit is always one. In the 32 and 64 bit floating point for-
              mats, the 80x87 does not actually store this bit, the 80x87 always assumes that it is one.
              Therefore, 32 and 64 bit floating point numbers are always normalized. In the extended
              precision 80 bit floating point format, the 80x87 does not assume that the H.O. bit of the
              mantissa is one, the H.O. bit of the number appears as part of the string of bits.
                   Normalized values provide the greatest precision for a given number of bits. How-
              ever, there are a large number of non-normalized values which we can represent with the
              80 bit format. These values are very close to zero and represent the set of values whose
              mantissa H.O. bit is not zero. The 80x87 FPUs support a special form of 80 bit known as
              denormalized values. Denormalized values allow the 80x87 to encode very small values it
              cannot encode using normalized values, but at a price. Denormalized values offer less bits
              of precision than normalized values. Therefore, using denormalized values in a computa-
              tion may introduce some slight inaccuracy into a computation. Of course, this is always
              better than underflowing the denormalized value to zero (which could make the compu-
              tation even less accurate), but you must keep in mind that if you work with very small
              values you may lose some accuracy in your computations. Note that the 80x87 status reg-
              ister contains a bit you can use to detect when the FPU uses a denormalized value in a
              computation.



14.4.3   The FPU Instruction Set
                   The 80387 (and later) FPU adds over 80 new instructions to the 80x86 instruction set.
              We can classify these instructions as data movement instructions, conversions, arithmetic
              instructions, comparisons, constant instructions, transcendental instructions, and miscellaneous
              instructions. The following sections describe each of the instructions in these categories.



14.4.4   FPU Data Movement Instructions
                   The data movement instructions transfer data between the internal FPU registers and
              memory. The instructions in this category are fld, fst, fstp, and fxch. The fld instructions
              always pushes its operand onto the floating point stack. The fstp instruction always pops
              the top of stack after storing the top of stack (tos) into its operation. The remaining instruc-
              tions do not affect the number of items on the stack.



14.4.4.1 The FLD Instruction
                  The fld instruction loads a 32 bit, 64 bit, or 80 bit floating point value onto the stack.
              This instruction converts 32 and 64 bit operand to an 80 bit extended precision value
              before pushing the value onto the floating point stack.
                  The fld instruction first decrements the tos pointer (bits 11-13 of the status register) and
              then stores the 80 bit value in the physical register specified by the new tos pointer. If the
              source operand of the fld instruction is a floating point data register, ST(i), then the actual


                                                                                                       Page 789
Chapter 14

                 register the 80x87 uses for the load operation is the register number before decrementing
                 the tos pointer. Therefore, fld st or fld st(0) duplicates the value on the top of the stack.
                     The fld instruction sets the stack fault bit if stack overflow occurs. It sets the the denor-
                 malized exception bit if you load an 80 bit denormalized value. It sets the invalid opera-
                 tion bit if you attempt to load an empty floating point register onto the stop of stack (or
                 perform some other invalid operation).
                 Examples:
                                       fld         st(1)
                                       fld         mem_32
                                       fld         MyRealVar
                                       fld         mem_64[bx]



14.4.4.2 The FST and FSTP Instructions
                     The fst and fstp instructions copy the value on the top of the floating point register
                 stack to another floating point register or to a 32, 64, or 80 bit memory variable. When
                 copying data to a 32 or 64 bit memory variable, the 80 bit extended precision value on the
                 top of stack is rounded to the smaller format as specified by the rounding control bits in
                 the FPU control register.
                     The fstp instruction pops the value off the top of stack when moving it to the destina-
                 tion location. It does this by incrementing the top of stack pointer in the status register
                 after accessing the data in st(0). If the destination operand is a floating point register, the
                 FPU stores the value at the specified register number before popping the data off the top of
                 the stack.
                     Executing an fstp st(0) instruction effectively pops the data off the top of stack with no
                 data transfer. Examples:
                                       fst         mem_32
                                       fstp        mem_64
                                       fstp        mem_64[ebx*8]
                                       fst         mem_80
                                       fst         st(2)
                                       fstp        st(1)
                 The last example above effectively pops st(1) while leaving st(0) on the top of the stack.
                      The fst and fstp instructions will set the stack exception bit if a stack underflow occurs
                 (attempting to store a value from an empty register stack). They will set the precision bit if
                 there is a loss of precision during the store operation (this will occur, for example, when
                 storing an 80 bit extended precision value into a 32 or 64 bit memory variable and there
                 are some bits lost during conversion). They will set the underflow exception bit when
                 storing an 80 bit value value into a 32 or 64 bit memory variable, but the value is too small
                 to fit into the destination operand. Likewise, these instructions will set the overflow
                 exception bit if the value on the top of stack is too big to fit into a 32 or 64 bit memory vari-
                 able. The fst and fstp instructions set the denormalized flag when you try to store a denor-
                 malized value into an 80 bit register or variable7. They set the invalid operation flag if an
                 invalid operation (such as storing into an empty register) occurs. Finally, these instruc-
                 tions set the C1 condition bit if rounding occurs during the store operation (this only
                 occurs when storing into a 32 or 64 bit memory variable and you have to round the man-
                 tissa to fit into the destination).



14.4.4.3 The FXCH Instruction
                     The fxch instruction exchanges the value on the top of stack with one of the other FPU
                 registers. This instruction takes two forms: one with a single FPU register as an operand,

    7. Storing a denormalized value into a 32 or 64 bit memory variable will always set the underflow exception bit.


Page 790
                                                                                   Floating Point Arithmetic

            the second without any operands. The first form exchanges the top of stack with the spec-
            ified register. The second form of fxch swaps the top of stack with st(1).
                 Many FPU instructions, e.g., fsqrt, operate only on the top of the register stack. If you
            want to perform such an operation on a value that is not on the top of stack, you can use
            the fxch instruction to swap that register with tos, perform the desired operation, and then
            use the fxch to swap the tos with the original register. The following example takes the
            square root of st(2):
                                 fxch       st(2)
                                 fsqrt
                                 fxch       st(2)
                The fxch instruction sets the stack exception bit if the stack is empty. It sets the invalid
            operation bit if you specify an empty register as the operand. This instruction always
            clears the C1 condition code bit.



14.4.5   Conversions
                  The 80x87 chip performs all arithmetic operations on 80 bit real quantities. In a sense,
            the fld and fst/fstp instructions are conversion instructions as well as data movement
            instructions because they automatically convert between the internal 80 bit real format
            and the 32 and 64 bit memory formats. Nonetheless, we’ll simply classify them as data
            movement operations, rather than conversions, because they are moving real values to
            and from memory. The 80x87 FPU provides five routines which convert to or from integer
            or binary coded decimal (BCD) format when moving data. These instructions are fild, fist,
            fistp, fbld, and fbstp.



14.4.5.1 The FILD Instruction
                 The fild (integer load) instruction converts a 16, 32, or 64 bit two’s complement integer
            to the 80 bit extended precision format and pushes the result onto the stack. This instruc-
            tion always expects a single operand. This operand must be the address of a word, double
            word, or quad word integer variable. Although the instruction format for fild uses the
            familiar mod/rm fields, the operand must be a memory variable, even for 16 and 32 bit
            integers. You cannot specify one of the 80386’s 16 or 32 bit general purpose registers. If
            you want to push an 80x86 general purpose register onto the FPU stack, you must first
            store it into a memory variable and then use fild to push that value of that memory vari-
            able.
                The fild instruction sets the stack exception bit and C1 (accordingly) if stack overflow
            occurs while pushing the converted value. Examples:
                                 fild       mem_16
                                 fild       mem_32[ecx*4]
                                 fild       mem_64[ebx+ecx*8]



14.4.5.2 The FIST and FISTP Instructions
                 The fist and fistp instructions convert the 80 bit extended precision variable on the top
            of stack to a 16, 32, or 64 bit integer and store the result away into the memory variable
            specified by the single operand. These instructions convert the value on tos to an integer
            according to the rounding setting in the FPU control register (bits 10 and 11). As for the fild
            instruction, the fist and fistp instructions will not let you specify one of the 80x86’s general
            purpose 16 or 32 bit registers as the destination operand.
                The fist instruction converts the value on the top of stack to an integer and then stores
            the result; it does not otherwise affect the floating point register stack. The fistp instruction
            pops the value off the floating point register stack after storing the converted value.

                                                                                                   Page 791
Chapter 14

                    These instructions set the stack exception bit if the floating point register stack is
                empty (this will also clear C1). They set the precision (imprecise operation) and C1 bits if
                rounding occurs (that is, if there is any fractional component to the value in st(0)). These
                instructions set the underflow exception bit if the result is too small (i.e., less than one but
                greater than zero or less than zero but greater than -1). Examples:
                                    fist        mem_16[bx]
                                    fist        mem_64
                                    fistp       mem_32

                       Don’t forget that these instructions use the rounding control settings to determine
                how they will convert the floating point data to an integer during the store operation. Be
                default, the rouding control is usually set to “round” mode; yet most programmers expect
                fist/fistp to truncate the decimal portion during conversion. If you want fist/fistp to truncate
                floating point values when converting them to an integer, you will need to set the round-
                ing control bits appropriately in the floating point control register.



14.4.5.3 The FBLD and FBSTP Instructions
                    The fbld and fbstp instructions load and store 80 bit BCD values. The fbld instruction
                converts a BCD value to its 80 bit extended precision equivalent and pushes the result
                onto the stack. The fbstp instruction pops the extended precision real value on tos, con-
                verts it to an 80 bit BCD value (rounding according to the bits in the floating point control
                register), and stores the converted result at the address specified by the destination mem-
                ory operand. Note that there is no fbst instruction which stores the value on tos without
                popping it.
                     The fbld instruction sets the stack exception bit and C1 if stack overflow occurs. It sets
                the invalid operation bit if you attempt to load an invalid BCD value. The fbstp instruction
                sets the stack exception bit and clears C1 if stack underflow occurs (the stack is empty). It
                sets the underflow flag under the same conditions as fist and fistp. Examples:
                ; Assuming fewer than eight items on the stack, the following
                ; code sequence is equivalent to an fbst instruction:
                                    fld         st(0)           ;Duplicate value on TOS.
                                    fbstp       mem_80
                ; The following example easily converts an 80 bit BCD value to
                ; a 64 bit integer:
                                    fbld        bcd_80          ;Get BCD value to convert.
                                    fist        mem_64          ;Store as an integer.



14.4.6       Arithmetic Instructions
                    The arithmetic instructions make up a small, but important, subset of the 80x87’s
                instruction set. These instructions fall into two general categories – those which operate
                on real values and those which operate on a real and an integer value.



14.4.6.1 The FADD and FADDP Instructions
                    These two instructions take the following forms:
                                    fadd
                                    faddp
                                    fadd        st(i), st(0)
                                    fadd        st(0), st(i)
                                    faddp       st(i), st(0)
                                    fadd        mem



Page 792
                                                                                      Floating Point Arithmetic

                  The first two forms are equivalent. They pop the two values on the top of stack, add
               them, and push their sum back onto the stack.
                    The next two forms of the fadd instruction, those with two FPU register operands,
               behave like the 80x86’s add instruction. They add the value in the second register operand
               to the value in the first register operand. Note that one of the register operands must be
               st(0)8.
                  The faddp instruction with two operands adds st(0) (which must always be the second
               operand) to the destination (first) operand and then pops st(0). The destination operand
               must be one of the other FPU registers.
                   The last form above, fadd with a memory operand, adds a 32 or 64 bit floating point
               variable to the value in st(0). This instruction will convert the 32 or 64 bit operands to an 80
               bit extended precision value before performing the addition. Note that this instruction
               does not allow an 80 bit memory operand.
                  These instructions can raise the stack, precision, underflow, overflow, denormalized,
               and illegal operation exceptions, as appropriate. If a stack fault exception occurs, C1
               denotes stack overflow or underflow.



14.4.6.2 The FSUB, FSUBP, FSUBR, and FSUBRP Instructions
                   These four instructions take the following forms:
                                    fsub
                                    fsubp
                                    fsubr
                                    fsubrp
                                    fsub       st(i). st(0)
                                    fsub       st(0), st(i)
                                    fsubp      st(i), st(0)
                                    fsub       mem
                                    fsubr      st(i). st(0)
                                    fsubr      st(0), st(i)
                                    fsubrp     st(i), st(0)
                                    fsubr      mem
                    With no operands, the fsub and fsubp instructions operate identically. They pop st(0)
               and st(1) from the register stack, compute st(0)-st(1), and the push the difference back onto
               the stack. The fsubr and fsubrp instructions (reverse subtraction) operate in an almost iden-
               tical fashion except they compute st(1)-st(0) and push that difference.
                    With two register operands (destination, source ) the fsub instruction computes destina-
               tion := destination - source. One of the two registers must be st(0). With two registers as
               operands, the fsubp also computes destination := destination - source and then it pops st(0)
               off the stack after computing the difference. For the fsubp instruction, the source operand
               must be st(0).
                    With two register operands, the fsubr and fsubrp instruction work in a similar fashion
               to fsub and fsubp, except they compute destination := source - destination.
                    The fsub mem and fsubr mem instructions accept a 32 or 64 bit memory operand. They
               convert the memory operand to an 80 bit extended precision value and subtract this from
               st(0) (fsub) or subtract st(0) from this value (fsubr) and store the result back into st(0).
                  These instructions can raise the stack, precision, underflow, overflow, denormalized,
               and illegal operation exceptions, as appropriate. If a stack fault exception occurs, C1
               denotes stack overflow or underflow.



  8. Because you will use st(0) quite a bit when programming the 80x87, MASM allows you to use the abbreviation
  st for st(0). However, this text will explicitly state st(0) so there will be no confusion.


                                                                                                      Page 793
Chapter 14


14.4.6.3 The FMUL and FMULP Instructions
                 The fmul and fmulp instructions multiply two floating point values. These instructions
             allow the following forms:
                                 fmul
                                 fmulp
                                 fmul        st(0), st(i)
                                 fmul        st(i), st(0)
                                 fmul        mem
                                 fmulp       st(i), st(0)
                 With no operands, fmul and fmulp both do the same thing – they pop st(0) and st(1),
             multiply these values, and push their product back onto the stack. The fmul instructions
             with two register operands compute destination := destination * source. One of the registers
             (source or destination) must be st(0).
                 The fmulp st(i), st(0) instruction computes st(i) := st(i) * st(0) and then pops st(0). This
             instruction uses the value for i before popping st(0). The fmul mem instruction requires a 32
             or 64 bit memory operand. It converts the specified memory variable to an 80 bit extended
             precision value and the multiplies st(0) by this value.
                 These instructions can raise the stack, precision, underflow, overflow, denormalized,
             and illegal operation exceptions, as appropriate. If rounding occurs during the computa-
             tion, these instructions set the C1 condition code bit. If a stack fault exception occurs, C1
             denotes stack overflow or underflow.



14.4.6.4 The FDIV, FDIVP, FDIVR, and FDIVRP Instructions
                 These four instructions allow the following forms:
                                 fdiv
                                 fdivp
                                 fdivr
                                 fdivrp
                                 fdiv        st(0), st(i)
                                 fdiv        st(i), st(0)
                                 fdivp       st(i), st(0)
                                 fdivr       st(0), st(i)
                                 fdivr       st(i), st(0)
                                 fdivrp      st(i), st(0)
                                 fdiv        mem
                                 fdivr       mem
                  With zero operands, the fdiv and fdivp instructions pop st(0) and st(1), compute
             st(0)/st(1), and push the result back onto the stack. The fdivr and fdivrp instructions also pop
             st(0) and st(1) but compute st(1)/st(0) before pushing the quotient onto the stack.
                 With two register operands, these instructions compute the following quotients:
                                 fdiv        st(0),   st(i)               ;st(0)   :=   st(0)/st(i)
                                 fdiv        st(i),   st(0)               ;st(i)   :=   st(i)/st(0)
                                 fdivp       st(i),   st(0)               ;st(i)   :=   st(i)/st(0)
                                 fdivr       st(i),   st(i)               ;st(0)   :=   st(0)/st(i)
                                 fdivrp      st(i),   st(0)               ;st(i)   :=   st(0)/st(i)
             The fdivp and fdivrp instructions also pop st(0) after performing the division operation. The
             value for i in this two instructions is computed before popping st(0).
                 These instructions can raise the stack, precision, underflow, overflow, denormalized,
             zero divide, and illegal operation exceptions, as appropriate. If rounding occurs during
             the computation, these instructions set the C1 condition code bit. If a stack fault exception
             occurs, C1 denotes stack overflow or underflow.


Page 794
                                                                                  Floating Point Arithmetic


14.4.6.5 The FSQRT Instruction
               The fsqrt routine does not allow any operands. It computes the square root of the value
           on tos and replaces st(0) with this result. The value on tos must be zero or positive, other-
           wise fsqrt will generate an invalid operation exception.
               This instruction can raise the stack, precision, denormalized, and invalid operation
           exceptions, as appropriate. If rounding occurs during the computation, fsqrt sets the C1
           condition code bit. If a stack fault exception occurs, C1 denotes stack overflow or under-
           flow.
           Example:
           ; Compute Z := sqrt(x**2 + y**2);
                               fld         x               ;Load X.
                               fld         st(0)           ;Duplicate X on TOS.
                               fmul                        ;Compute X**2.
                               fld         y               ;Load Y.
                               fld         st(0)           ;Duplicate Y on TOS.
                               fmul                        ;Compute Y**2.
                               fadd                        ;Compute X**2 + Y**2.
                               fsqrt                       ;Compute sqrt(x**2 + y**2).
                               fst         Z               ;Store away result in Z.



14.4.6.6 The FSCALE Instruction
                The fscale instruction pops two values off the stack. It multiplies st(0) by 2st(1) and
           pushes the result back onto the stack. If the value in st(1) is not an integer, fscale truncates
           it towards zero before performing the operation.
                This instruction raises the stack exception if there are not two items currently on the
           stack (this will also clear C1 since stack underflow occurs). It raises the precision exception
           if there is a loss of precision due to this operation (this occurs when st(1) contains a large,
           negative, value). Likewise, this instruction sets the underflow or overflow exception bits if
           you multiply st(0) by a very large positive or negative power of two. If the result of the
           multiplication is very small, fscale could set the denormalized bit. Also, this instruction
           could set the invalid operation bit if you attempt to fscale illegal values. Fscale sets C1 if
           rounding occurs in an otherwise correct computation. Example:
                               fild        Sixteen         ;Push sixteen onto the stack.
                               fld         x               ;Compute x * (2**16).
                               fscale
                                 .
                                 .
                                 .
           Sixteen             word        16



14.4.6.7 The FPREM and FPREM1 Instructions
               The fprem and fprem1 instructions compute a partial remainder. Intel designed the fprem
           instruction before the IEEE finalized their floating point standard. In the final draft of the
           IEEE floating point standard, the definition of fprem was a little different than Intel’s origi-
           nal design. Unfortunately, Intel needed to maintain compatibility with the existing soft-
           ware that used the fprem instruction, so they designed a new version to handle the IEEE
           partial remainder operation, fprem1. You should always use fprem1 in new software you
           write, therefore we will only discuss fprem1 here, although you use fprem in an identical
           fashion.
              Fprem1 computes the partial remainder of st(0)/st(1). If the difference between the
           exponents of st(0) and st(1) is less than 64, fprem1 can compute the exact remainder in one


                                                                                                  Page 795
Chapter 14

             operation. Otherwise you will have to execute the fprem1 two or more times to get the cor-
             rect remainder value. The C2 condition code bit determines when the computation is com-
             plete. Note that fprem1 does not pop the two operands off the stack; it leaves the partial
             remainder in st(0) and the original divisor in st(1) in case you need to compute another
             partial product to complete the result.
                  The fprem1 instruction sets the stack exception flag if there aren’t two values on the
             top of stack. It sets the underflow and denormal exception bits if the result is too small. It
             sets the invalid operation bit if the values on tos are inappropriate for this operation. It
             sets the C2 condition code bit if the partial remainder operation is not complete. Finally, it
             loads C3, C1, and C0 with bits zero, one, and two of the quotient, respectively.
             Example:
             ; Compute Z := X mod Y
                                 fld         y
                                 fld         x
             PartialLp:          fprem1
                                 fstsw       ax             ;Get condition bits in AX.
                                 test        ah, 100b       ;See if C2 is set.
                                 jnz         PartialLp      ;Repeat if not done yet.
                                 fstp        Z              ;Store remainder away.
                                 fstp        st(0)          ;Pop old y value.



14.4.6.8 The FRNDINT Instruction
                 The frndint instruction rounds the value on tos to the nearest integer using the round-
             ing algorithm specified in the control register.
                 This instruction sets the stack exception flag if there is no value on the tos (it will also
             clear C1 in this case). It sets the precision and denormal exception bits if there was a loss of
             precision. It sets the invalid operation flag if the value on the tos is not a valid number.



14.4.6.9 The FXTRACT Instruction
                 The fxtract instruction is the complement to the fscale instruction. It pops the value off
             the top of the stack and pushes a value which is the integer equivalent of the exponent (in
             80 bit real form), and then pushes the mantissa with an exponent of zero (3fffh in biased
             form).
                  This instruction raises the stack exception if there is a stack underflow when popping
             the original value or a stack overflow when pushing the two results (C1 determines
             whether stack overflow or underflow occurs). If the original top of stack was zero, fxtract
             sets the zero division exception flag. The denormalized flag is set if the result warrants it;
             and the invalid operation flag is set if there are illegal input values when you execute
             fxtract.
             Example:
             ; The following example extracts the binary exponent of X and
             ; stores this into the 16 bit integer variable Xponent.
                                 fld         x
                                 fxtract
                                 fstp        st(0)
                                 fistp       Xponent



14.4.6.10 The FABS Instruction
                 Fabs computes the absolute value of st(0) by clearing the sign bit of st(0). It sets the
             stack exception bit and invalid operation bits if the stack is empty.


Page 796
                                                                                        Floating Point Arithmetic

            Example:
            ; Compute X := sqrt(abs(x));

                                  fld         x
                                  fabs
                                  fsqrt
                                  fstp        x



14.4.6.11 The FCHS Instruction
                Fchs changes the sign of st(0)’s value by inverting its sign bit. It sets the stack excep-
            tion bit and invalid operation bits if the stack is empty. Example:
            ; Compute X := -X if X is positive, X := X if X is negative.
                                  fld         x
                                  fabs
                                  fchs
                                  fstp        x



14.4.7   Comparison Instructions
                The 80x87 provides several instructions for comparing real values. The fcom, fcomp,
            fcompp, fucom, fucomp, and fucompp instructions compare the two values on the top of stack
            and set the condition codes appropriately. The ftst instruction compares the value on the
            top of stack with zero. The fxam instrution checks the value on tos and reports sign, nor-
            malization, and tag information.
                 Generally, most programs test the condition code bits immediately after a compari-
            son. Unfortunately, there are no conditional jump instructions that branch based on the
            FPU condition codes. Instead, you can use the fstsw instruction to copy the floating point
            status register (see “The FPU Status Register” on page 785) into the ax register; then you
            can use the sahf instruction to copy the ah register into the 80x86’s condition code bits.
            After doing this, you can can use the conditional jump instructions to test some condition.
            This technique copies C0 into the carry flag, C2 into the parity flag, and C3 into the zero
            flag. The sahf instruction does not copy C1 into any of the 80x86’s flag bits.
                 Since the sahf instruction does not copy any 80x87 processor status bits into the sign or
            overflow flags, you cannot use the jg, jl, jge, or jle instructions. Instead, use the ja, jae, jb, jbe,
            je, and jz instructions when testing the results of a floating point comparison. Yes, these con-
            ditional jumps normally test unsigned values and floating point numbers are signed values. How-
            ever, use the unsigned conditional branches anyway; the fstsw and sahf instructions set the
            80x86 flags register to use the unsigned jumps.



14.4.7.1 The FCOM, FCOMP, and FCOMPP Instructions
                 The fcom, fcomp, and fcompp instructions compare st(0) to the specified operand and
            set the corresponding 80x87 condition code bits based on the result of the comparison. The
            legal forms for these instructions are
                                  fcom
                                  fcomp
                                  fcompp
                                  fcom        st(i)
                                  fcomp       st(i)
                                  fcom        mem
                                  fcomp       mem




                                                                                                         Page 797
Chapter 14

                     With no operands, fcom, fcomp, and fcompp compare st(0) against st(1) and set the pro-
                cessor flags accordingly. In addition, fcomp pops st(0) off the stack and fcompp pops both
                st(0) and st(1) off the stack.
                     With a single register operand, fcom and fcomp compare st(0) against the specified reg-
                ister. Fcomp also pops st(0) after the comparison.
                    With a 32 or 64 bit memory operand, the fcom and fcomp instructions convert the
                memory variable to an 80 bit extended precision value and then compare st(0) against this
                value, setting the condition code bits accordingly. Fcomp also pops st(0) after the compari-
                son.
                    These instructions set C2 (which winds up in the parity flag) if the two operands are
                not comparable (e.g., NaN). If it is possible for an illegal floating point value to wind up in
                a comparison, you should check the parity flag for an error before checking the desired
                condition.
                     These instructions set the stack fault bit if there aren’t two items on the top of the reg-
                ister stack. They set the denormalized exception bit if either or both operands are denor-
                malized. They set the invalid operation flag if either or both operands are quite NaNs.
                These instructions always clear the C1 condition code.



14.4.7.2 The FUCOM, FUCOMP, and FUCOMPP Instructions
                    These instructions are similar to the fcom, fcomp, and fcompp instructions, although
                they only allow the following forms:
                                     fucom
                                     fucomp
                                     fucompp
                                     fucom      st(i)
                                     fucomp     st(i)
                     The difference between fcom/fcomp/fcompp and fucom/fucomp/fucompp is rela-
                tively minor. The fcom/fcomp/fcompp instructions set the invalid operation exception bit
                if you compare two NaNs. The fucom/fucomp/fucompp instructions do not. In all other
                cases, these two sets of instructions behave identically.



14.4.7.3 The FTST Instruction
                     The ftst instruction compares the value in st(0) against 0.0. It behaves just like the fcom
                instruction would if st(1) contained 0.0. Note that this instruction does not differentiate
                -0.0 from +0.0. If the value in st(0) is either of these values, ftst will set C3 to denote equal-
                ity. If you need to differentiate -0.0 from +0.0, use the fxam instruction. Note that this
                instruction does not pop st(0) off the stack.



14.4.7.4 The FXAM Instruction
                    The fxam instruction examines the value in st(0) and reports the results in the condi-
                tion code bits (see “The FPU Status Register” on page 785 for details on how fxam sets
                these bits). This instruction does not pop st(0) off the stack.



14.4.8       Constant Instructions
                    The 80x87 FPU provides several instructions that let you load commonly used con-
                stants onto the FPU’s register stack. These instructions set the stack fault, invalid opera-



Page 798
                                                                                  Floating Point Arithmetic

            tion, and C1 flags if a stack overflow occurs; they do not otherwise affect the FPU flags.
            The specific instructions in this category include:
                                fldz                       ;Pushes   +0.0.
                                fld1                       ;Pushes   +1.0.
                                fldpi                      ;Pushes   π.
                                fldl2t                     ;Pushes   log2(10).
                                fldl2e                     ;Pushes   log2(e).
                                fldlg2                     ;Pushes   log10(2).
                                fldln2                     ;Pushes   ln(2).



14.4.9   Transcendental Instructions
                The 80387 and later FPUs provide eight transcendental (log and trigonometric)
            instructions to compute a partial tangent, partial arctangent, 2x-1, y * log2(x), and y *
            log2(x+1). Using various algebraic identities, it is easy to compute most of the other com-
            mon transcendental functions using these instructions.



14.4.9.1 The F2XM1 Instruction
                 F2xm1 computes 2st(0)-1. The value in st(0) must be in the range -1.0 ≤ st(0) ≤ +1.0. If
            st(0) is out of range f2xm1 generates an undefined result but raises no exceptions. The com-
            puted value replaces the value in st(0). Example:
            ; Compute 10x using the identity: 10x = 2x*lg(10) (lg = log2).
                                fld        x
                                fldl2t
                                fmul
                                f2xm1
                                fld1
                                fadd
            Note that f2xm1 computes 2x-1, which is why the code above adds 1.0 to the result at the
            end of the computation.



14.4.9.2 The FSIN, FCOS, and FSINCOS Instructions
                 These instructions pop the value off the top of the register stack and compute the sine,
            cosine, or both, and push the result(s) back onto the stack. The fsincos pushes the sine fol-
            lowed by the cosine of the original operand, hence it leaves cos(st(0)) in st(0) and sin(st(0))
            in st(1).
                 These instructions assume st(0) specifies an angle in radians and this angle must be in
            the range -263 < st(0) < +263. If the original operand is out of range, these instructions set
            the C2 flag and leave st(0) unchanged. You can use the fprem1 instruction, with a divisor of
            2π, to reduce the operand to a reasonable range.
                These instructions set the stack fault/C1, precision, underflow, denormalized, and
            invalid operation flags according to the result of the computation.



14.4.9.3 The FPTAN Instruction
                Fptan computes the tangent of st(0) and pushes this value and then it pushes 1.0 onto
            the stack. Like the fsin and fcos instructions, the value of st(0) is assumed to be in radians
            and must be in the range -263<st(0)<+263. If the value is outside this range, fptan sets C2 to
            indicate that the conversion did not take place. As with the fsin, fcos, and fsincos instruc-
            tions, you can use the fprem1 instruction to reduce this operand to a reasonable range
            using a divisor of 2π.

                                                                                                  Page 799
Chapter 14

                 If the argument is invalid (i.e., zero or π radians, which causes a division by zero) the
             result is undefined and this instruction raises no exceptions. Fptan will set the stack fault,
             precision, underflow, denormal, invalid operation, C2, and C1 bits as required by the oper-
             ation.



14.4.9.4 The FPATAN Instruction
                  This instruction expects two values on the top of stack. It pops them and computes the
             following:
                 st(0) = tan-1( st(1) / st(0) )
                  The resulting value is the arctangent of the ratio on the stack expressed in radians. If
             you have a value you wish to compute the tangent of, use fld1 to create the appropriate
             ratio and then execute the fpatan instruction.
                 This instruction affects the stack fault/C1, precision, underflow, denormal, and
             invalid operation bits if an problem occurs during the computation. It sets the C1 condi-
             tion code bit if it has to round the result.



14.4.9.5 The FYL2X and FYL2XP1 Instructions
                 The fyl2x and fyl2xp1 instructions compute st(1) * log2(st(0)) and st(1) * log2(st(0)+1),
             respectively. Fyl2x requires that st(0) be greater than zero, fyl2xp1 requires st(0) to be in the
             range:
                          2                           2 
                                 -   < st ( 0 ) <  1 –  -------  
                   – 1 –  ------
                              2                               2
                 Fyl2x is useful for computing logs to bases other than two; fyl2xp1 is useful for comput-
             ing compound interest, maintaining the maximum precision during computation.
                 Fyl2x can affect all the exception flags. C1 denotes rounding if there is not other error,
             stack overflow/underflow if the stack fault bit is set.
                 The fyl2xp1 instruction does not affect the overflow or zero divide exception flags.
             These exceptions occur when st(0) is very small or zero. Since fyl2xp1 adds one to st(0)
             before computing the function, this condition never holds. Fyl2xp1 affects the other flags in
             a manner identical to fyl2x.



14.4.10 Miscellaneous instructions
                 The 80x87 FPU includes several additional instructions which control the FPU, syn-
             chronize operations, and let you test or set various status bits. These instructions include
             finit/fninit, fdisi/fndisi, feni/fneni, fldcw, fstcw/fnstcw, fclex/fnclex, fsave/fnsave, frstor, frstpm,
             fstsw/fnstsw, fstenv/fnstenv, fldenv, fincstp, fdecstp, fwait, fnop, and ffree. The fdisi/fndisi, feni/fneni,
             and frstpm are active only on FPUs earlier than the 80387, so we will not consider them
             here.
                 Many of these instructions have two forms. The first form is Fxxxx and the second
             form is FNxxxx. The version without the “N” emits an fwait instruction prior to opcode
             (which is standard for most coprocessor instructions). The version with the “N” does not
             emit the fwait opcode (“N” stands for no wait).



14.4.10.1 The FINIT and FNINIT Instructions
                 The finit instruction intializes the FPU for proper operation. Your applications should
             execute this instruction before executing any other FPU instructions. This instruction ini-

Page 800
                                                                                   Floating Point Arithmetic

            tializes the control register to 37Fh (see “The FPU Control Register” on page 782), the sta-
            tus register to zero (see “The FPU Status Register” on page 785) and the tag word to
            0FFFFh. The other registers are unaffected.



14.4.10.2 The FWAIT Instruction
                The fwait instruction pauses the system until any currently executing FPU instruction
            completes. This is required because the FPU on the 80486sx and earlier CPU/FPU combi-
            nations can execute instructions in parallel with the CPU. Therefore, any FPU instruction
            which reads or writes memory could suffer from a data hazard if the main CPU accesses
            that same memory location before the FPU reads or writes that location. The fwait instruc-
            tion lets you synchronize the operation of the FPU by waiting until the completion of the
            current FPU instruction. This resolves the data hazard by, effectively, inserting an explict
            “stall” into the execution stream.



14.4.10.3 The FLDCW and FSTCW Instructions
                The fldcw and fstcw instructions require a single 16 bit memory operand:
                                 fldcw      mem_16
                                 fstcw      mem_16
                These two instructions load the control register (see “The FPU Control Register” on
            page 782) from a memory location (fldcw) or store the control word to a 16 bit memory
            location (fstcw).
                When using the fldcw instruction to turn on one of the exceptions, if the corresponding
            exception flag is set when you enable that exception, the FPU will generate an immediate
            interrupt before the CPU executes the next instruction. Therefore, you should use the fclex
            instruction to clear any pending interrupts before changing the FPU exception enable bits.



14.4.10.4 The FCLEX and FNCLEX Instructions
                 The fclex and fnclex instructions clear all exception bits the stack fault bit, and the busy
            flag in the FPU status register (see “The FPU Status Register” on page 785).



14.4.10.5 The FLDENV, FSTENV, and FNSTENV Instructions
                                 fstenv     mem_14b
                                 fnstenv    mem_14b
                                 fldenv     mem_14b
                The fstenv/fnstenv instructions store a 14-byte FPU environment record to the memory
            operand specified. When operating in real mode (the only mode this text considers), the
            environment record takes the form appearing in Figure 14.11.
                You must execute the fstenv and fnstenv instructions with the CPU interrupts disabled.
            Furthermore, you should always ensure that the FPU is not busy before executing this
            instruction. This is easily accomplished by using the following code:
                                 pushf                      ;Preserve I flag.
                                 cli                        ;Disable interrupts.
                                 fstenv     mem_14b         ;Implicit wait for not busy.
                                 fwait                      ;Wait for operation to finish.
                                 popf                       ;Restore I flag.
                The fldenv instruction loads the FPU environment from the specified memory oper-
            and. Note that this instruction lets you load the the status word. There is no explicit
            instruction like fldcw to accomplish this.

                                                                                                   Page 801
Chapter 14



                                                                                         Offset

                  Data Ptr Bits 16-19                     Unused Bits (set to zero)       12
                                                Data Ptr (Bits 0-15)                      10
                 Instr Ptr Bits 16-19   0                 Instruction opcode (11 bits)    8
                                                Instr Ptr (Bits 0-15)                     6
                                                   Tag Word                               4
                                                  Status Word                             2
                                                 Control Word                             0

 Figure 14.11 FPU Environment Record (16 Bit Real Mode)




14.4.10.6 The FSAVE, FNSAVE, and FRSTOR Instructions
                                        fsave            mem_94b
                                        fnsave           mem_94b
                                        frstor           mem_94b
                   These instructions save and restore the state of the FPU. This includes saving all the
               internal control, status, and data registers. The destination location for fsave/fnsave (source
               location for frstor) must be 94 bytes long. The first 14 bytes correspond to the environment
               record the fldenv and fstenv instructions use; the remaining 80 bytes hold the data from the
               FPU register stack written out as st(0) through st(7). Frstor reloads the environment record
               and floating point registers from the specified memory operand.
                    The fsave/fnsave and frstor instructions are mainly intended for task switching. You can
               also use fsave/fnsave and frstor as a “push all” and “pop all” sequence to preserve the state
               of the FPU.
                    Like the fstenv and fldenv instructions, interrupts should be disabled while saving or
               restoring the FPU state. Otherwise another interrupt service routine could manipulate the
               FPU registers and invalidate the operation of the fsave/fnsave or frestore operation. The fol-
               lowing code properly protects the environment data while saving and restore the FPU sta-
               tus:
               ; Preserve the FPU state, assume di points at the environment
               ; record in memory.

                                        pushf
                                        cli
                                        fsave            [si]
                                        fwait
                                        popf
                                            .
                                            .
                                            .
                                        pushf
                                        cli
                                        frstor           [si]
                                        fwait
                                        popf




Page 802
                                                                                   Floating Point Arithmetic


14.4.10.7 The FSTSW and FNSTSW Instructions
                                 fstsw      ax
                                 fnstsw     ax
                                 fstsw      mem_16
                                 fnstsw     mem_16
                 These instructions store the FPU status register (see “The FPU Status Register” on
            page 785) into a 16 bit memory location or the ax register. These instructions are unusual
            in the sense that they can copy an FPU value into one of the 80x86 general purpose regis-
            ters. Of course, the whole purpose behind allowing the transfer of the status register into
            ax is to allow the CPU to easily test the condition code register with the sahf instruction.



14.4.10.8 The FINCSTP and FDECSTP Instructions
                The fincstp and fdecstp instructions do not take any operands. They simply increment
            and decrement the stack pointer bits (mod 8) in the FPU status register. These two instruc-
            tions clear the C1 flag, but do not otherwise affect the condition code bits in the FPU status
            register.



14.4.10.9 The FNOP Instruction
                The fnop instruction is simply an alias for fst st, st(0). It performs no other operation on
            the FPU.



14.4.10.10The FFREE Instruction
                                 ffree      st(i)
                 This instruction modifies the tag bits for register i in the tags register to mark the spec-
            ified register as emtpy. The value is unaffected by this instruction, but the FPU will no
            longer be able to access that data (without resetting the appropriate tag bits).



14.4.11 Integer Operations
                The 80x87 FPUs provide special instructions that combine integer to extended preci-
            sion conversion along with various arithmetic and comparison operations. These instruc-
            tions are the following:
                                 fiadd      int
                                 fisub      int
                                 fisubr     int
                                 fimul      int
                                 fidiv      int
                                 fidivr     int
                                 ficom      int
                                 ficomp     int
                These instructions convert their 16 or 32 bit integer operands to an 80 bit extended
            precision floating point value and then use this value as the source operand for the speci-
            fied operation. These instructions use st(0) as the destination operand.




                                                                                                   Page 803
Chapter 14


14.5    Sample Program: Additional Trigonometric Functions
                  This section provides various examples of 80x87 FPU programming. This group of
             routines provides several trigonometric, inverse trigonometric, logarithmic, and exponen-
             tial functions using various algebraic identities. All these functions assume that the input
             values are on the stack are are within valid ranges for the given functions. The trigono-
             metric routines expect angles expressed in radians and the inverse trig routines produce
             angles measured in radians.
                 This program (transcnd.asm) appears on the companion CD-ROM.

                                 .xlist
                                 include    stdlib.a
                                 includelib stdlib.lib
                                 .list

                                 .386
                                 .387
                                 option    segment:use16

             dseg                segment   para public ‘data’

             result              real8     ?

             ; Some variables we use to test the routines in this package:

             cotvar              real8     3.0
             cotRes              real8     ?
             acotRes             real8     ?

             cscvar              real8     1.5
             cscRes              real8     ?
             acscRes             real8     ?

             secvar              real8     0.5
             secRes              real8     ?
             asecRes             real8     ?

             sinvar              real8     0.75
             sinRes              real8     ?
             asinRes             real8     ?

             cosvar              real8     0.25
             cosRes              real8     ?
             acosRes             real8     ?

             Two2xvar            real8     -2.5
             Two2xRes            real8     ?
             lgxRes              real8     ?

             Ten2xVar            real8     3.75
             Ten2xRes            real8     ?
             logRes              real8     ?

             expVar              real8     3.25
             expRes              real8     ?
             lnRes               real8     ?

             Y2Xx                real8     3.0
             Y2Xy                real8     3.0
             Y2XRes              real8     ?

             dseg                ends

             cseg                segment   para public ‘code’
                                 assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg



Page 804
                                                          Floating Point Arithmetic

; COT(x) - Computes the cotangent of st(0) and leaves result in st(0).
;                st(0) contains x (in radians) and must be between
;                -2**63 and +2**63
;
;       There must be at least one free register on the stack for
;       this routine to operate properly.
;
;      cot(x) = 1/tan(x)

cot              proc      near
                 fsincos
                 fdivr
                 ret
cot              endp

; CSC(x) - computes the cosecant of st(0) and leaves result in st(0).
;                st(0) contains x (in radians) and must be between
;                -2**63 and +2**63.
;       The cosecant of x is undefined for any value of sin(x) that
;                produces zero (e.g., zero or pi radians).
;
;       There must be at least one free register on the stack for
;       this routine to operate properly.
;
;      csc(x) = 1/sin(x)

csc              proc      near
                 fsin
                 fld1
                 fdivr
                 ret
csc              endp

; SEC(x) - computes the secant of st(0) and leaves result in st(0).
;                st(0) contains x (in radians) and must be between
;                -2**63 and +2**63.
;
;      The secant of x is undefined for any value of cos(x) that
;      produces zero (e.g., pi/2 radians).
;
;      There must be at least one free register on the stack for
;      this routine to operate properly.
;
;      sec(x) = 1/cos(x)

sec              proc      near
                 fcos
                 fld1
                 fdivr
                 ret
sec              endp

; ASIN(x)- Computes the arcsine of st(0) and leaves the result in st(0).
;                Allowable range: -1<=x<=+1
;                There must be at least two free registers for this
;                function to operate properly.
;
;      asin(x) = atan(sqrt(x*x/(1-x*x)))

asin             proc      near
                 fld       st(0)       ;Duplicate X on tos.
                 fmul                  ;Compute X**2.
                 fld       st(0)       ;Duplicate X**2 on tos.
                 fld1                  ;Compute 1-X**2.
                 fsubr
                 fdiv                  ;Compute X**2/(1-X**2).
                 fsqrt                 ;Compute sqrt(x**2/(1-X**2)).
                 fld1                  ;To compute full arctangent.
                 fpatan                ;Compute atan of the above.
                 ret


                                                                          Page 805
Chapter 14

             asin             endp

             ; ACOS(x)- Computes the arccosine of st(0) and leaves the
             ;                result in st(0).
             ;                Allowable range: -1<=x<=+1
             ;                There must be at least two free registers for
             ;                this function to operate properly.
             ;
             ;      acos(x) = atan(sqrt((1-x*x)/(x*x)))

             acos             proc     near
                              fld      st(0)        ;Duplicate X on tos.
                              fmul                  ;Compute X**2.
                              fld      st(0)        ;Duplicate X**2 on tos.
                              fld1                  ;Compute 1-X**2.
                              fsubr
                              fdiv                  ;Compute (1-x**2)/X**2.
                              fsqrt                 ;Compute sqrt((1-X**2)/X**2).
                              fld1                  ;To compute full arctangent.
                              fpatan                ;Compute atan of the above.
                              ret
             acos             endp

             ; ACOT(x)- Computes the arccotangent of st(0) and leaves the
             ;                result in st(0).
             ;                X cannot equal zero.
             ;                There must be at least one free register for
             ;                this function to operate properly.
             ;
             ;      acot(x) = atan(1/x)

             acot             proc     near
                              fld1                  ;fpatan computes
                              fxch                  ; atan(st(1)/st(0)).
                              fpatan                ; we want atan(st(0)/st(1)).
                              ret
             acot             endp

             ; ACSC(x)- Computes the arccosecant of st(0) and leaves the
             ;                result in st(0).
             ;                abs(X) must be greater than one.
             ;                There must be at least two free registers for
             ;                this function to operate properly.
             ;
             ;      acsc(x) = atan(sqrt(1/(x*x-1)))

             acsc             proc     near
                              fld      st(0)        ;Compute x*x
                              fmul
                              fld1                  ;Compute x*x-1
                              fsub
                              fld1                  ;Compute 1/(x*x-1)
                              fdivr
                              fsqrt                 ;Compute sqrt(1/(x*x-1))
                              fld1
                              fpatan                ;Compute atan of above.
                              ret
             acsc             endp

             ; ASEC(x)- Computes the arcsecant of st(0) and leaves the
             ;                result in st(0).
             ;                abs(X) must be greater than one.
             ;                There must be at least two free registers for
             ;                this function to operate properly.
             ;
             ;      asec(x) = atan(sqrt(x*x-1))

             asec             proc     near
                              fld      st(0)        ;Compute x*x
                              fmul


Page 806
                                                             Floating Point Arithmetic

                 fld1                    ;Compute x*x-1
                 fsub
                 fsqrt                   ;Compute sqrt(x*x-1)
                 fld1
                 fpatan                  ;Compute atan of above.
                 ret
asec             endp

; TwoToX(x)- Computes 2**x.
;                It does this by using the algebraic identity:
;
;                2**x = 2**int(x) * 2**frac(x).
;                We can easily compute 2**int(x) with fscale and
;                2**frac(x) using f2xm1.
;
;                This routine requires three free registers.

SaveCW           word      ?
MaskedCW         word      ?

TwoToX           proc      near
                 fstcw     cseg:SaveCW

; Modify the control word to truncate when rounding.

                 fstcw     cseg:MaskedCW
                 or        byte ptr cseg:MaskedCW+1, 1100b
                 fldcw     cseg:MaskedCW

                 fld       st(0)         ;Duplicate tos.
                 fld       st(0)
                 frndint                 ;Compute integer portion.

                 fxch                   ;Swap whole and int values.
                 fsub      st(0), st(1) ;Compute fractional part.

                 f2xm1                   ;Compute 2**frac(x)-1.
                 fld1
                 fadd                    ;Compute 2**frac(x).

                 fxch                    ;Get integer portion.
                 fld1                    ;Compute 1*2**int(x).
                 fscale
                 fstp      st(1)         ;Remove st(1) (which is 1).

                 fmul                    ;Compute 2**int(x) * 2**frac(x).

                 fldcw     cseg:SaveCW   ;Restore rounding mode.
                 ret
TwoToX           endp


; TenToX(x)- Computes 10**x.
;
;                This routine requires three free registers.
;
;      TenToX(x) = 2**(x * lg(10))

TenToX           proc      near
                 fldl2t                  ;Put lg(10) onto the stack
                 fmul                    ;Compute x*lg(10)
                 call      TwoToX        ;Compute 2**(x * lg(10)).
                 ret
TenToX           endp

; exp(x)- Computes e**x.
;
;                This routine requires three free registers.
;
;      exp(x) = 2**(x * lg(e))


                                                                             Page 807
Chapter 14


             exp              proc      near
                              fldl2e                ;Put lg(e) onto the stack.
                              fmul                  ;Compute x*lg(e).
                              call      TwoToX      ;Compute 2**(x * lg(e))
                              ret
             exp              endp

             ; YtoX(y,x)- Computes y**x (y=st(1), x=st(0)).
             ;
             ;                This routine requires three free registers.
             ;
             ;                Y must be greater than zero.
             ;
             ;      YtoX(y,x) = 2 ** (x * lg(y))

             YtoX             proc      near
                              fxch                  ;Compute lg(y).
                              fld1
                              fxch
                              fyl2x

                              fmul                  ;Compute x*lg(y).
                              call      TwoToX      ;Compute 2**(x*lg(y)).
                              ret
             YtoX             endp

             ; LOG(x)- Computes the base 10 logarithm of x.
             ;
             ;                Usual range for x (>0).
             ;
             ;      LOG(x) = lg(x)/lg(10).

             log              proc      near
                              fld1
                              fxch
                              fyl2x                 ;Compute 1*lg(x).
                              fldl2t                ;Load lg(10).
                              fdiv                  ;Compute lg(x)/lg(10).
                              ret
             log              endp


             ; LN(x)- Computes the base e logarithm of x.
             ;
             ;                X must be greater than zero.
             ;
             ;      ln(x) = lg(x)/lg(e).

             ln               proc      near
                              fld1
                              fxch
                              fyl2x                 ;Compute 1*lg(x).
                              fldl2e                ;Load lg(e).
                              fdiv                  ;Compute lg(x)/lg(10).
                              ret
             ln               endp

             ; This main program tests the various functions in this package.

             Main             proc
                              mov       ax, dseg
                              mov       ds, ax
                              mov       es, ax
                              meminit

                              finit

             ; Check to see if cot and acot are working properly.



Page 808
                                                          Floating Point Arithmetic

                 fld       cotVar
                 call      cot
                 fst       cotRes
                 call      acot
                 fstp      acotRes

                 printff
                 byte      “x=%8.5gf, cot(x)=%8.5gf, acot(cot(x)) = %8.5gf\n”,0
                 dword     cotVar, cotRes, acotRes

; Check to see if csc and acsc are working properly.

                 fld       cscVar
                 call      csc
                 fst       cscRes
                 call      acsc
                 fstp      acscRes

                 printff
                 byte      “x=%8.5gf, csc(x)=%8.5gf, acsc(csc(x)) = %8.5gf\n”,0
                 dword     cscVar, cscRes, acscRes

; Check to see if sec and asec are working properly.

                 fld       secVar
                 call      sec
                 fst       secRes
                 call      asec
                 fstp      asecRes

                 printff
                 byte      “x=%8.5gf, sec(x)=%8.5gf, asec(sec(x)) = %8.5gf\n”,0
                 dword     secVar, secRes, asecRes

; Check to see if sin and asin are working properly.

                 fld       sinVar
                 fsin
                 fst       sinRes
                 call      asin
                 fstp      asinRes

                 printff
                 byte      “x=%8.5gf, sin(x)=%8.5gf, asin(sin(x)) = %8.5gf\n”,0
                 dword     sinVar, sinRes, asinRes

; Check to see if cos and acos are working properly.

                 fld       cosVar
                 fcos
                 fst       cosRes
                 call      acos
                 fstp      acosRes

                 printff
                 byte      “x=%8.5gf, cos(x)=%8.5gf, acos(cos(x)) = %8.5gf\n”,0
                 dword     cosVar, cosRes, acosRes

; Check to see if 2**x and lg(x) are working properly.

                 fld       Two2xVar
                 call      TwoToX
                 fst       Two2xRes
                 fld1
                 fxch
                 fyl2x
                 fstp      lgxRes

                 printff
                 byte      “x=%8.5gf, 2**x =%8.5gf, lg(2**x) = %8.5gf\n”,0


                                                                          Page 809
Chapter 14

                               dword     Two2xVar, Two2xRes, lgxRes

             ; Check to see if 10**x and l0g(x) are working properly.

                               fld       Ten2xVar
                               call      TenToX
                               fst       Ten2xRes
                               call      LOG
                               fstp      logRes

                               printff
                               byte      “x=%8.5gf, 10**x =%8.2gf, log(10**x) = %8.5gf\n”,0
                               dword     Ten2xVar, Ten2xRes, logRes

             ; Check to see if exp(x) and ln(x) are working properly.

                               fld       expVar
                               call      exp
                               fst       expRes
                               call      ln
                               fstp      lnRes

                               printff
                               byte      “x=%8.5gf, e**x =%8.2gf, ln(e**x) = %8.5gf\n”,0
                               dword     expVar, expRes, lnRes

             ; Check to see if y**x is working properly.

                               fld       Y2Xy
                               fld       Y2Xx
                               call      YtoX
                               fstp      Y2XRes

                               printff
                               byte      “x=%8.5gf, y =%8.5gf, y**x = %8.4gf\n”,0
                               dword     Y2Xx, Y2Xy, Y2XRes

             Quit:             ExitPgm
             Main              endp
             cseg              ends

             sseg              segment   para stack ‘stack’
             stk               byte      1024 dup (“stack “)
             sseg              ends

             zzzzzzseg         segment   para public ‘zzzzzz’
             LastBytes         byte      16 dup (?)
             zzzzzzseg         ends
                               end       Main

             Sample program output:
             x= 3.00000, cot(x)=-7.01525,   acot(cot(x))   =   3.00000
             x= 1.50000, csc(x)= 1.00251,   acsc(csc(x))   =   1.50000
             x= 0.50000, sec(x)= 1.13949,   asec(sec(x))   =   0.50000
             x= 0.75000, sin(x)= 0.68163,   asin(sin(x))   =   0.75000
             x= 0.25000, cos(x)= 0.96891,   acos(cos(x))   =   0.25000
             x=-2.50000, 2**x = 0.17677,    lg(2**x)       =   -2.50000
             x= 3.75000, 10**x = 5623.41,   log(10**x)     =   3.75000
             x= 3.25000, e**x = 25.79,      ln(e**x)       =   3.25000
             x= 3.00000, y     = 3.00000,   y**x           =   27.0000



14.6    Laboratory Exercises




Page 810
                                                                                Floating Point Arithmetic


14.6.1   FPU vs StdLib Accuracy
                In this laboratory exercise you will will run two programs that perform 20,000,000
            floating point additions. These programs do the first 10,000,000 additions using the 80x87
            FPU, they do the second 10,000,000 additions using the Standard Library’s floating point
            routines. This exercise demonstrates the relative accuracy of the two floating point mecha-
            nisms.
                 For your lab report: assemble and run the EX14_1.asm program (it’s on the compan-
            ion CD-ROM). This program adds together 10,000,000 64-bit floating point values and
            prints their sum. Describe the results in your lab report. Time these operations and report
            the time difference in your lab report. Note that the exact sum these operations should pro-
            duce is 1.00000010000e+0000.
                After running Ex14_1.asm, repeat this process for the Ex14_2.asm file. Ex14_2 differs
            from Ex14_1 insofar as Ex14_2 lets the Standard Library routines operate on 80-bit mem-
            ory operands (the FPU cannot operate on 80-bit memory operands, so this part remains
            unchanged). Time the execution of Ex14_2’s two components. Compare these times
            against the running time of Ex14_1 and explain any differences.

            ;   EX14_1.asm
            ;
            ;   This program runs some tests to determine how well the floating point
            ;   arithmetic in the Standard Library compares with the floating point
            ;   arithmetic on the 80x87. It does this performing various operations
            ;   using both methods and comparing the result.
            ;
            ;   Of course, you must have an 80x87 FPU (or 80486 or later processor)
            ;   in order to run this code.

                                .386
                                option       segment:use16

                                include    stdlib.a
                                includelib stdlib.lib

            dseg                segment   para public 'data'

            ; Since this is an accuracy test, this code uses REAL8 values for
            ; all operations

            slValue1            real8     1.0
            slSmallVal          real8     1.0e-14

            Value1              real8     1.0
            SmallVal            real8     1.0e-14

            Buffer              byte      20 dup (0)

            dseg                ends


            cseg                segment   para public 'code'
                                assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

            Main                proc
                                mov       ax, dseg
                                mov       ds, ax
                                mov       es, ax
                                meminit

                                finit                     ;Initialize the FPU

            ; Do 10,000,000 floating point additions:




                                                                                                Page 811
Chapter 14

                                printff
                                byte      "Adding 10,000,000 FP values together with the “
                                byte      “FPU",cr,lf,0

                                mov       ecx, 10000000
             FPLoop:            fld       Value1
                                fld       SmallVal
                                fadd
                                fstp      Value1
                                dec       ecx
                                jnz       FPLoop

                                printff
                                byte      "Result = %20GE\n",cr,lf,0
                                dword     Value1

             ; Do 10,000,000 floating point additions with the Standard Library fpadd
             ; routine:

                                printff
                                byte      cr,lf
                                byte      "Adding 10,000,000 FP values together with the “
                                byte      “StdLib", cr,lf
                                byte      "Note: this may take a few minutes to run, don't “
                                byte      “get too impatient"
                                byte      cr,lf,0

                                mov       ecx, 10000000
             SLLoop:            lesi      slValue1
                                ldfpa
                                lesi      slSmallVal
                                ldfpo
                                fpadd
                                lesi      slValue1
                                sdfpa
                                dec       ecx
                                jnz       SLLoop

                                printff
                                byte      "Result = %20GE\n",cr,lf,0
                                dword     slValue1

             Quit:              ExitPgm                ;DOS macro to quit program.
             Main               endp

             cseg               ends

             sseg               segment   para stack 'stack'
             stk                db        1024 dup ("stack   ")
             sseg               ends

             zzzzzzseg          segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
             LastBytes          db        16 dup (?)
             zzzzzzseg          ends
                                end       Main




             ;   EX14_2.asm
             ;
             ;   This program runs some tests to determine how well the floating point
             ;   arithmetic in the Standard Library compares with the floating point
             ;   arithmetic on the 80x87. It lets the standard library routines use
             ;   the full 80-bit format since they allow it and the FPU does not.
             ;
             ;   Of course, you must have an 80x87 FPU (or 80486 or later processor)
             ;   in order to run this code.



Page 812
                                                           Floating Point Arithmetic


                 .386
                 option      segment:use16

                 include    stdlib.a
                 includelib stdlib.lib

dseg             segment   para public 'data'

slValue1         real10    1.0
slSmallVal       real10    1.0e-14

Value1           real8     1.0
SmallVal         real8     1.0e-14

Buffer           byte      20 dup (0)

dseg             ends

cseg             segment   para public 'code'
                 assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

Main             proc
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax
                 mov       es, ax
                 meminit
                 finit                   ;Initialize the FPU

; Do 10,000,000 floating point additions:

                 printff
                 byte      "Adding 10,000,000 FP values together with the “
                 byte      “FPU",cr,lf,0

                 mov       ecx, 10000000
FPLoop:          fld       Value1
                 fld       SmallVal
                 fadd
                 fstp      Value1
                 dec       ecx
                 jnz       FPLoop

                 printff
                 byte      "Result = %20GE\n",cr,lf,0
                 dword     Value1

; Do 10,000,000 floating point additions with the Standard Library fpadd
; routine:

                 printff
                 byte      cr,lf
                 byte      "Adding 10,000,000 FP values together with the “
                 byte      “StdLib", cr,lf
                 byte      "Note: this may take a few minutes to run, don't “
                 byte      “get too impatient"
                 byte      cr,lf,0

                 mov       ecx, 10000000
SLLoop:          lesi      slValue1
                 lefpa
                 lesi      slSmallVal
                 lefpo
                 fpadd
                 lesi      slValue1
                 sefpa
                 dec       ecx
                 jnz       SLLoop

                 printff


                                                                           Page 813
Chapter 14

                                       byte       "Result = %20LE\n",cr,lf,0
                                       dword      slValue1

                 Quit:                 ExitPgm                     ;DOS macro to quit program.
                 Main                  endp

                 cseg                  ends

                 sseg                  segment    para stack 'stack'
                 stk                   db         1024 dup ("stack   ")
                 sseg                  ends

                 zzzzzzseg             segment     para public 'zzzzzz'
                 LastBytes             db          16 dup (?)
                 zzzzzzseg             ends
                                       end        Main



14.7    Programming Projects


14.8    Summary
                     For many applications integer arithmetic has two insurmountable drawbacks – it is
                 not easy to represent fractional values with integers and integers have a limited dynamic
                 range. Floating point arithmetic provides an approximation to real arithmetic that over-
                 comes these two limitations.
                     Floating point arithmetic, however, is not without its own problems. Floating point
                 arithmetic suffers from limited precision. As a result, inaccuracies can creep into a calcula-
                 tion. Therefore, floating point arithmetic does not completely follow normal algebraic
                 rules. There are five very important rules to keep in mind when using floating point arith-
                 metic: (1`) The order of evaluation can affect the accuracy of the result; (2) Whenever add-
                 ing and subtracting numbers, the accuracy of the result may be less than the precision
                 provided by the floating point format; (3) When performing a chain of calculations involv-
                 ing addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, try to perform the multiplication
                 and division operations first; (4) When multiplying and dividing values, try to multiply
                 large and small numbers together first and try to divide numbers with the same relative
                 magnitue first; (5) When comparing two floating point numbers, always keep in mind that
                 errors can creep into the computations, therefore you should check to see if one value is
                 within a certain range of the other. For more information, see
                          •    “The Mathematics of Floating Point Arithmetic” on page 771
                      Early on Intel recognized the need for a hardware floating point unit. They hired three
                 mathematicians to design highly accurate floating point formats and algorithms for their
                 80x87 family of FPUs. These formats, with slight modifications, become the IEEE 754 and
                 IEEE 854 floating point standards. The IEEE standard actually provides for three different
                 formats: a 32 bit standard precision format, a 64 bit double precision format, and an
                 extended precision format. Intel implemented the extended precision format using 80
                 bits9. The 32 bit format uses a 24 bit mantissa (the H.O. bit is an implied one and is not
                 stored in the 32 bits), an eight bit bias 127 exponent, and a one bit sign. The 64 bit format
                 provides a 53 bit mantissa (again, the H.O. bit is always one and is not stored in the 64 b it
                 value), an 11 bit excess 1023 exponent, and a one bit sign. The 80 bit extended precision
                 format uses a 64 bit exponent, a 15 bit excess 16363 exponent, and a single bit sign. For
                 more information, see
                          •    “IEEE Floating Point Formats” on page 774



    9. The IEEE standard only requires that the extended precision format contain more bits than the double precision
    format.


Page 814
                                                                     Floating Point Arithmetic

    Although 80x87 FPUs and CPUs with built-in FPUs (80486 and Pentium) are becom-
ing very common, it is still possible that you may need to execute code that uses floating
point arithmetic on a machine without an FPU. In such cases you will need to supply soft-
ware routines to execute the floating point arithmetic. Fortunately, the UCR Standard
Library provides a set of floating point routines you can call. The Standard Library
includes routines to load and store floating point values, convert between integer and
floating point formats, add, subtract, multiply, and divide floating point values, convert
between ASCII and floating point, and output floating point values. Even if you have an
FPU installed, the Standard Library’s conversion and output routines are quite useful. For
more information, see
        •   “The UCR Standard Library Floating Point Routines” on page 777
     For fast floating point arithmetic, software doesn’t stand a chance against hardware.
The 80x87 FPUs provide fast and convient floating point operations by extended the
80x86’s instruction set to handle floating point arithmetic. In addition to the new instruc-
tions, the 80x87 FPUs also provide eight new data registers, a control register, a status reg-
ister, and several other internal registers. The FPU data registers, unlike the 80x86’s
general purpose registers, are organized as a stack. Although it is possible to manipulate
the registers as though they were a standard register file, most FPU applications use the
stack mechanism when computing floating point results. The FPU control register lets you
initialize the 80x87 FPU in one of several different modes. The control register lets you set
the rounding control, the precision available during computation, and choose which
exceptions can cause an interrupt. The 80x87 status register reports the current state of the
FPU. This register provides bits that determine if the FPU is currently busy, determine if a
previous instruction has generated an exception, determine the physical register number
of the top of the register stack, and provide the FPU condition codes. For more informa-
tion on the 80x87 register set, see
        •   “The 80x87 Floating Point Coprocessors” on page 781
        •   “FPU Registers” on page 781
        •   “The FPU Data Registers” on page 782
        •   “The FPU Control Register” on page 782
        •   “The FPU Status Register” on page 785
    In addition to the IEEE single, double, and extended preoision data types, the 80x87
FPUs also support various integer and BCD data types. The FPU will automatically con-
vert to and from these data types when loading and storing such values. For more infor-
mation on these data type formats, see
        •   “FPU Data Types” on page 788
    The 80x87 FPUs provide a wide range of floating point operations by augmenting the
80x86’s instruction set. We can classify the FPU instructions into eight categories: data
movement instructions, conversions, arithmetic instructions, comparison instructions,
constant instructions, transcendental instructions, miscellaneous instructions, and integer
instructions. For more information on these instruction types, see
        •   “The FPU Instruction Set” on page 789
        •   “FPU Data Movement Instructions” on page 789
        •   “Conversions” on page 791
        •   “Arithmetic Instructions” on page 792
        •   “Comparison Instructions” on page 797
        •   “Constant Instructions” on page 798
        •   “Transcendental Instructions” on page 799
        •   “Miscellaneous instructions” on page 800
        •   “Integer Operations” on page 803
    Although the 80387 and later FPUs provide a rich set of transcendental functions,
there are many trigonometric, inverse trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic func-
tions missing from the instruction set. However, the missing functions are easy to synthe-
size using algebraic identities. This chapter provides source code for many of these
routines as an example of FPU programming. For more information, see

                                                                                     Page 815
Chapter 14

             •   “Sample Program: Additional Trigonometric Functions” on page 804




Page 816
                                                                                                                  Floating Point Arithmetic


14.9     Questions
   1)         Why don’t the normal rules of algebra apply to floating point arithmetic?
   2)         Give an example of a sequence of operations whose order of evaluation will produce dif-
              ferent results with finite precision arithmetic.
   3)         Explain why limited precision addition and subtraction operations can cause a loss of pre-
              cision during a calculation.
   4)         Why should you, if at all possible, perform multiplications and divisions first in a calcula-
              tion involving multiplication or division as well as addition or subtraction?
   5)         Explain the difference between a normalized, unnormalized, and denormalized floating
              point value.
   6)         Using the UCR Standard Library, convert the following expression to 80x86 assembly
              code (assume all variables are 64 bit double precision values). Be sure to perform any nec-
              essary algebraic manipulations to ensure the maximum accuracy. You can assume all vari-
              ables fall in the range ±1e-10…±1e+10.
              a) Z := X * X + Y * Y                                b) Z := (X-Y)*Z
              c) Z := X*Y - X/Y                                    d) Z := (X+Y)/(X-Y)
              e) Z := (X*X)/(Y*Y)                                  f) Z := X*X + Y + 1.0
   7)         Convert the above statements to 80x87 FPU code.
   8)         The following problems provide definitions for the hyperbolic trigonometric functions.
              Encode each of these using the 80x87 FPU instructions and the exp(x) and ln(x) routines
              provided in this chapter.
                              x – e–x                                              x + e–x
              a) sinh x = e------------------                      b) cosh x = e------------------
                                                                                                 -
                                      2                                                      2

                           sinh x                                                   1
              c) tanh x = --------------                           d) csch x = -------------
                                  cosh x                                                sinh x

                                1                                              cosh x
              e) sech x = --------------                           f) coth x = --------------
                                 cosh x                                               sinh x

              g) asinh x = ln(x + x 2 + 1)                         h) acosh x = ln(x + x 2 – 1)
                                  1+x
                           ln(------------)
                                  1–x                                              x± 1+x                    2
              i) atanh x = --------------------
                                              -                    j) acsch x = ln(---------------------------
                                                                                                             -)
                                    2                                                                 x

                                                                                          x+1
                                                                                       ln(---------------)
                              x± 1–x                   2                                 x–1
              k) asech x = ln(---------------------------)         l) atanh x = ------------------------
                                                x                                                2


   9)         Create a log(x,y) function which computes logy x. The algebraic identity for this is
                                                    log 2 x
                                           log yx = ------------
                                                               -
                                                    log 2y



   10)        Interval arithmetic involves performing a calculation with every result rounded down
              and then repeating the computation with each result rounded up. At the end of these two
              computations, you know that the true result must lie between the two computed results.
              The rounding control bits in the FPU control register let you select round up and round
              down modes. Repeat question six applying interval arithmetic and compute the two
              bounds for each of those problems (a-f).



                                                                                                                                  Page 817
Chapter 14

    11)      The mantissa precision control bits in the FPU control register simply control where the
             FPU rounds results. Selecting a lower precision does not improve the performance of the
             FPU. Therefore, any new software you write should set these two bits to ones to get 64 bits
             of precision when performing calculations. Can you provide one reason why you might
             want to set the precision to something other than 64 bits?
    12)      Suppose you have two 64 bit variables, X and Y, that you want to compare to see if they
             are equal. As you know, you should not compare them directly to see if they are equal, but
             rather see if they are less than some small value apart. Suppose ε, the error constant, is
             1e-300. Provide the code to load ax with zero if X=Y and load ax with one if X≠Y.
    13)      Repeat problem 12, except test for:
             a) X ≤ Y                                  b) X < Y
             c) X ≥ Y                                  d) X > Y
             e) X ≠ Y


    14)      What instruction can you use to see if the value in st(0) is denormalized?
    15)      Assuming no stack underflow or overflow, what is the C1 condition code bit usually used
             for?
    16)      Many texts, when describing the FPU chip, suggest that you can use the FPU to perform
             integer arithmetic. An argument generally given is that the FPU can support 64 bit inte-
             gers whereas the CPU can only support 16 or 32 bit integers. What is wrong with this
             argument? Why would you not want to use the FPU to perform integer arithmetic? Why
             does the FPU even provide integer instructions?
    17)      Suppose you have a 64 bit double precision floating point value in memory. Describe how
             you could take the absolute value of this variable without using the FPU (i.e., by using
             only 80x86 instructions).
    18)      Explain how to change the sign of the variable in question 17.
    19)      Why does the TwoToX function (see “Sample Program: Additional Trigonometric Func-
             tions” on page 804) have to compute the result using fscale and fyl2x? Why can’t it use fyl2x
             along?
    20)      Explain a possible problem with the following code sequence:
                                 stp        mem_64
                                 xor        byte ptr mem_64+7, 80h              ;Tweak sign bit




Page 818
