Strings and Character Sets                                                                     Chapter 15
                     A string is a collection of objects stored in contiguous memory locations. Strings are
                usually arrays of bytes, words, or (on 80386 and later processors) double words. The 80x86
                microprocessor family supports several instructions specifically designed to cope with
                strings. This chapter explores some of the uses of these string instructions.
                    The 8088, 8086, 80186, and 80286 can process two types of strings: byte strings and
                word strings. The 80386 and later processors also handle double word strings. They can
                move strings, compare strings, search for a specific value within a string, initialize a string
                to a fixed value, and do other primitive operations on strings. The 80x86’s string instruc-
                tions are also useful for manipulating arrays, tables, and records. You can easily assign or
                compare such data structures using the string instructions. Using string instructions may
                speed up your array manipulation code considerably.


15.0     Chapter Overview

                     This chapter presents a review of the operation of the 80x86 string instructions. Then
                it discusses how to process character strings using these instructions. Finally, it concludes
                by discussing the string instruction available in the UCR Standard Library. The sections
                below that have a “•” prefix are essential. Those sections with a “❏” discuss advanced
                topics that you may want to put off for a while.
                          •   The 80x86 string instructions.
                          •   Character strings.
                          •   Character string functions.
                          •   String functions in the UCR Standard Library.
                          ❏   Using the string instructions on other data types.



15.1     The 80x86 String Instructions
                    All members of the 80x86 family support five different string instructions: movs, cmps,
                scas, lods, and stos1. They are the string primitives since you can build most other string
                operations from these five instructions. How you use these five instructions is the topic of
                the next several sections.


15.1.1     How the String Instructions Operate

                    The string instructions operate on blocks (contiguous linear arrays) of memory. For
                example, the movs instruction moves a sequence of bytes from one memory location to
                another. The cmps instruction compares two blocks of memory. The scas instruction scans
                a block of memory for a particular value. These string instructions often require three
                operands, a destination block address, a source block address, and (optionally) an element
                count. For example, when using the movs instruction to copy a string, you need a source
                address, a destination address, and a count (the number of string elements to move).
                    Unlike other instructions which operate on memory, the string instructions are sin-
                gle-byte instructions which don’t have any explicit operands. The operands for the string
                instructions include



   1. The 80186 and later processor support two additional string instructions, INS and OUTS which input strings of
   data from an input port or output strings of data to an output port. We will not consider these instructions in this
   chapter.


                                                                                                             Page 819

                           Thi d          t         t d ith F       M k    402
Chapter 15

                           •   the si (source index) register,
                           •   the di (destination index) register,
                           •   the cx (count) register,
                           •   the ax register, and
                           •   the direction flag in the FLAGS register.

                      For example, one variant of the movs (move string) instruction copies a string from the
                 source address specified by ds:si to the destination address specified by es:di, of length cx.
                 Likewise, the cmps instruction compares the string pointed at by ds:si, of length cx, to the
                 string pointed at by es:di.
                      Not all instructions have source and destination operands (only movs and cmps sup-
                 port them). For example, the scas instruction (scan a string) compares the value in the
                 accumulator to values in memory. Despite their differences, the 80x86’s string instructions
                 all have one thing in common – using them requires that you deal with two segments, the
                 data segment and the extra segment.


15.1.2       The REP/REPE/REPZ and REPNZ/REPNE Prefixes

                     The string instructions, by themselves, do not operate on strings of data. The movs
                 instruction, for example, will move a single byte, word, or double word. When executed
                 by itself, the movs instruction ignores the value in the cx register. The repeat prefixes tell
                 the 80x86 to do a multi-byte string operation. The syntax for the repeat prefix is:
                 Field:
                 Label repeat           mnemonic      operand                     ;comment

                 For MOVS:
                        rep             movs          {operands}

                 For CMPS:
                        repe            cmps          {operands}
                        repz            cmps          {operands}
                        repne           cmps          {operands}
                        repnz           cmps          {operands}

                 For SCAS:
                        repe            scas          {operands}
                        repz            scas          {operands}
                        repne           scas          {operands}
                        repnz           scas          {operands}

                 For STOS:
                        rep             stos          {operands}

                      You don’t normally use the repeat prefixes with the lods instruction.
                     As you can see, the presence of the repeat prefixes introduces a new field in the source
                 line – the repeat prefix field. This field appears only on source lines containing string
                 instructions. In your source file:
                           •   the label field should always begin in column one,
                           •   the repeat field should begin at the first tab stop, and
                           •   the mnemonic field should begin at the second tab stop.

                     When specifying the repeat prefix before a string instruction, the string instruction
                 repeats cx times2. Without the repeat prefix, the instruction operates only on a single byte,
                 word, or double word.




    2. Except for the cmps instruction which repeats at most the number of times specified in the cx register.


Page 820
                                                                                   Strings and Character Sets

                You can use repeat prefixes to process entire strings with a single instruction. You can
            use the string instructions, without the repeat prefix, as string primitive operations to syn-
            thesize more powerful string operations.
                The operand field is optional. If present, MASM simply uses it to determine the size of
            the string to operate on. If the operand field is the name of a byte variable, the string
            instruction operates on bytes. If the operand is a word address, the instruction operates on
            words. Likewise for double words. If the operand field is not present, you must append a
            “B”, “W”, or “D” to the end of the string instruction to denote the size, e.g., movsb, movsw,
            or movsd.


15.1.3   The Direction Flag

                Besides the si, di, si, and ax registers, one other register controls the 80x86’s string
            instructions – the flags register. Specifically, the direction flag in the flags register controls
            how the CPU processes strings.
                 If the direction flag is clear, the CPU increments si and di after operating upon each
            string element. For example, if the direction flag is clear, then executing movs will move
            the byte, word, or double word at ds:si to es:di and will increment si and di by one, two, or
            four. When specifying the rep prefix before this instruction, the CPU increments si and di
            for each element in the string. At completion, the si and di registers will be pointing at the
            first item beyond the string.
                  If the direction flag is set, then the 80x86 decrements si and di after processing each
            string element. After a repeated string operation, the si and di registers will be pointing at
            the first byte or word before the strings if the direction flag was set.
                The direction flag may be set or cleared using the cld (clear direction flag) and std (set
            direction flag) instructions. When using these instructions inside a procedure, keep in
            mind that they modify the machine state. Therefore, you may need to save the direction
            flag during the execution of that procedure. The following example exhibits the kinds of
            problems you might encounter:
            StringStuff:
                              cld
                    <do some operations>
                              call     Str2
                    <do some string operations requiring D=0>
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
            Str2              proc     near
                              std
                    <Do some string operations>
                              ret
            Str2              endp

                This code will not work properly. The calling code assumes that the direction flag is
            clear after Str2 returns. However, this isn’t true. Therefore, the string operations executed
            after the call to Str2 will not function properly.
                 There are a couple of ways to handle this problem. The first, and probably the most
            obvious, is always to insert the cld or std instructions immediately before executing a
            string instruction. The other alternative is to save and restore the direction flag using the
            pushf and popf instructions. Using these two techniques, the code above would look like
            this:
                Always issuing cld or std before a string instruction:
            StringStuff:
                              cld
                    <do some operations>
                              call     Str2
                              cld
                    <do some string operations requiring D=0>


                                                                                                    Page 821
Chapter 15
                                        .
                                        .
                                        .
                Str2                proc     near
                                    std
                          <Do some string operations>
                                    ret
                Str2                endp

                       Saving and restoring the flags register:
                StringStuff:
                                    cld
                          <do some operations>
                                    call     Str2
                          <do some string operations requiring D=0>
                                        .
                                        .
                                        .
                Str2                proc     near
                                    pushf
                                    std
                          <Do some string operations>
                                    popf
                                    ret
                Str2                endp

                    If you use the pushf and popf instructions to save and restore the flags register, keep in
                mind that you’re saving and restoring all the flags. Therefore, such subroutines cannot
                return any information in the flags. For example, you will not be able to return an error
                condition in the carry flag if you use pushf and popf.


15.1.4       The MOVS Instruction

                    The movs instruction takes four basic forms. Movs moves bytes, words, or double
                words, movsb moves byte strings, movsw moves word strings, and movsd moves double
                word strings (on 80386 and later processors). These four instructions use the following
                syntax:
                          {REP}   MOVSB
                          {REP}   MOVSW
                          {REP}   MOVSD           ;Available only on 80386 and later processors
                          {REP}   MOVS Dest, Source

                    The movsb (move string, bytes) instruction fetches the byte at address ds:si, stores it at
                address es:di, and then increments or decrements the si and di registers by one. If the rep
                prefix is present, the CPU checks cx to see if it contains zero. If not, then it moves the byte
                from ds:si to es:di and decrements the cx register. This process repeats until cx becomes
                zero.
                    The movsw (move string, words) instruction fetches the word at address ds:si, stores it
                at address es:di, and then increments or decrements si and di by two. If there is a rep prefix,
                then the CPU repeats this procedure as many times as specified in cx.
                    The movsd instruction operates in a similar fashion on double words. Incrementing or
                decrementing si and di by four for each data movement.
                     MASM automatically figures out the size of the movs instruction by looking at the size
                of the operands specified. If you’ve defined the two operands with the byte (or compara-
                ble) directive, then MASM will emit a movsb instruction. If you’ve declared the two labels
                via word (or comparable), MASM will generate a movws instruction. If you’ve declared the
                two labels with dword, MASM emits a movsd instruction. The assembler will also check the
                segments of the two operands to ensure they match the current assumptions (via the
                assume directive) about the es and ds registers. You should always use the movsb, movsw,
                and movsd forms and forget about the movs form.




Page 822
                                                                    Strings and Character Sets

     Although, in theory, the movs form appears to be an elegant way to handle the move
string instruction, in practice it creates more trouble than it’s worth. Furthermore, this
form of the move string instruction implies that movs has explicit operands, when, in fact,
the si and di registers implicitly specify the operands. For this reason, we’ll always use the
movsb, movsw, or movsd instructions. When used with the rep prefix, the movsb instruction
will move the number of bytes specified in the cx register. The following code segment
copies 384 bytes from String1 to String2:
                    cld
                    lea        si, String1
                    lea        di, String2
                    mov        cx, 384
          rep       movsb
                      .
                      .
                      .
String1             byte       384 dup (?)
String2             byte       384 dup (?)

    This code, of course, assumes that String1 and String2 are in the same segment and
both the ds and es registers point at this segment. If you substitute movws for movsb, then
the code above will move 384 words (768 bytes) rather than 384 bytes:
                    cld
                    lea        si, String1
                    lea        di, String2
                    mov        cx, 384
          rep       movsw
                      .
                      .
                      .
String1             word       384 dup (?)
String2             word       384 dup (?)

    Remember, the cx register contains the element count, not the byte count. When using
the movsw instruction, the CPU moves the number of words specified in the cx register.
    If you’ve set the direction flag before executing a movsb/movsw/movsd instruction, the
CPU decrements the si and di registers after moving each string element. This means that
the si and di registers must point at the end of their respective strings before issuing a
movsb, movsw, or movsd instruction. For example,
                    std
                    lea        si, String1+383
                    lea        di, String2+383
                    mov        cx, 384
          rep       movsb
                      .
                      .
                      .
String1             byte       384 dup (?)
String2             byte       384 dup (?)

    Although there are times when processing a string from tail to head is useful (see the
cmps description in the next section), generally you’ll process strings in the forward direc-
tion since it’s more straightforward to do so. There is one class of string operations where
being able to process strings in both directions is absolutely mandatory: processing strings
when the source and destination blocks overlap. Consider what happens in the following
code:
                    cld
                    lea        si, String1
                    lea        di, String2
                    mov        cx, 384
          rep       movsb
                      .
                      .
                      .
String1             byte       ?
String2             byte       384 dup (?)




                                                                                     Page 823
Chapter 15



              1st move operation:


                X     A    B        C   D   E     F    G     H     I           J    K     L




              2nd move operation:


                X     X    B        C   D   E     F    G     H     I           J    K     L




              3rd move operation:


                X     X    X        C   D   E     F    G     H     I           J    K     L




              4th move operation:


                X     X    X        X   D   E     F    G     H     I           J    K     L




              nth move operation:


                X     X    X        X   X   X     X    X     X     X           X    X     L




 Figure 15.1 Overwriting Data During a Block Move Operation

                   This sequence of instructions treats String1 and String2 as a pair of 384 byte strings.
               However, the last 383 bytes in the String1 array overlap the first 383 bytes in the String2
               array. Let’s trace the operation of this code byte by byte.
                    When the CPU executes the movsb instruction, it copies the byte at ds:si (String1) to the
               byte pointed at by es:di (String2). Then it increments si and di, decrements cx by one, and
               repeats this process. Now the si register points at String1+1 (which is the address of String2)
               and the di register points at String2+1. The movsb instruction copies the byte pointed at by
               si to the byte pointed at by di. However, this is the byte originally copied from location
               String1. So the movsb instruction copies the value originally in location String1 to both loca-
               tions String2 and String2+1. Again, the CPU increments si and di, decrements cx, and
               repeats this operation. Now the movsb instruction copies the byte from location String1+2
               (String2+1) to location String2+2. But once again, this is the value that originally appeared
               in location String1. Each repetition of the loop copies the next element in String1 to the next
               available location in the String2 array. Pictorially, it looks something like that in
               Figure 15.1.


Page 824
                                                                                     Strings and Character Sets



                1st move operation:


                  X      A    B       C   D    E     F    G     H     I    J     K     L




                2nd move operation:


                  X      A    B       C   D    E     F    G     H     I    J     K     K




                3rd move operation:


                  X      A    B       C   D    E     F    G     H     I    J     J     K




                4th move operation:


                  X      A    B       C   D    E     F    G     H     I    I     J     K




                nth move operation:


                  X      A    A       B   C    D     E    F     G     H    I     J     K




Figure 15.2 Correct Way to Move Data With a Block Move Operation

                  The end result is that X gets replicated throughout the string. The move instruction
              copies the source operand into the memory location which will become the source oper-
              and for the very next move operation, which causes the replication.
                 If you really want to move one array into another when they overlap, you should
              move each element of the source string to the destination string starting at the end of the
              two strings as shown in Figure 15.2.
                   Setting the direction flag and pointing si and di at the end of the strings will allow you
              to (correctly) move one string to another when the two strings overlap and the source
              string begins at a lower address than the destination string. If the two strings overlap and
              the source string begins at a higher address than the destination string, then clear the
              direction flag and point si and di at the beginning of the two strings.
                   If the two strings do not overlap, then you can use either technique to move the
              strings around in memory. Generally, operating with the direction flag clear is the easiest,
              so that makes the most sense in this case.
                   You shouldn’t use the movs instruction to fill an array with a single byte, word, or
              double word value. Another string instruction, stos, is much better suited for this purpose.
              However, for arrays whose elements are larger than four bytes, you can use the movs
              instruction to initialize the entire array to the content of the first element. See the questions
              for additional information.


                                                                                                     Page 825
Chapter 15


15.1.5       The CMPS Instruction

                    The cmps instruction compares two strings. The CPU compares the string referenced
                by es:di to the string pointed at by ds:si. Cx contains the length of the two strings (when
                using the rep prefix). Like the movs instruction, the MASM assembler allows several differ-
                ent forms of this instruction:
                        {REPE}      CMPSB
                        {REPE}      CMPSW
                        {REPE}      CMPSD                     ;Available only on 80386 and later
                        {REPE}      CMPS       dest, source
                        {REPNE}     CMPSB
                        {REPNE}     CMPSW
                        {REPNE}     CMPSD                     ;Available only on 80386 and later
                        {REPNE}     CMPS       dest, source

                     Like the movs instruction, the operands present in the operand field of the cmps
                instruction determine the size of the operands. You specify the actual operand addresses
                in the si and di registers.
                     Without a repeat prefix, the cmps instruction subtracts the value at location es:di from
                the value at ds:si and updates the flags. Other than updating the flags, the CPU doesn’t
                use the difference produced by this subtraction. After comparing the two locations, cmps
                increments or decrements the si and di registers by one, two, or four (for
                cmpsb/cmpsw/cmpsd, respectively). Cmps increments the si and di registers if the direction
                flag is clear and decrements them otherwise.
                    Of course, you will not tap the real power of the cmps instruction using it to compare
                single bytes or words in memory. This instruction shines when you use it to compare
                whole strings. With cmps, you can compare consecutive elements in a string until you find
                a match or until consecutive elements do not match.
                   To compare two strings to see if they are equal or not equal, you must compare corre-
                sponding elements in a string until they don’t match. Consider the following strings:
                                                         “String1”
                                                         “String1”
                     The only way to determine that these two strings are equal is to compare each charac-
                ter in the first string to the corresponding character in the second. After all, the second
                string could have been “String2” which definitely is not equal to “String1”. Of course,
                once you encounter a character in the destination string which doesn’t equal the corre-
                sponding character in the source string, the comparison can stop. You needn’t compare
                any other characters in the two strings.
                     The repe prefix accomplishes this operation. It will compare successive elements in a
                string as long as they are equal and cx is greater than zero. We could compare the two
                strings above using the following 80x86 assembly language code:
                ; Assume both strings are in the same segment and ES and DS
                ; both point at this segment.
                                    cld
                                    lea        si, AdrsString1
                                    lea        di, AdrsString2
                                    mov        cx, 7
                        repe        cmpsb

                    After the execution of the cmpsb instruction, you can test the flags using the standard
                conditional jump instructions. This lets you check for equality, inequality, less than,
                greater than, etc.
                    Character strings are usually compared using lexicographical ordering. In lexicographi-
                cal ordering, the least significant element of a string carries the most weight. This is in
                direct contrast to standard integer comparisons where the most significant portion of the


Page 826
                                                                    Strings and Character Sets

number carries the most weight. Furthermore, the length of a string affects the compari-
son only if the two strings are identical up to the length of the shorter string. For example,
“Zebra” is less than “Zebras”, because it is the shorter of the two strings, however,
“Zebra” is greater than “AAAAAAAAAAH!” even though it is shorter. Lexicographical
comparisons compare corresponding elements until encountering a character which
doesn’t match, or until encountering the end of the shorter string. If a pair of correspond-
ing characters do not match, then this algorithm compares the two strings based on that
single character. If the two strings match up to the length of the shorter string, we must
compare their length. The two strings are equal if and only if their lengths are equal and
each corresponding pair of characters in the two strings is identical. Lexicographical
ordering is the standard alphabetical ordering you’ve grown up with.
    For character strings, use the cmps instruction in the following manner:
        •   The direction flag must be cleared before comparing the strings.
        •   Use the cmpsb instruction to compare the strings on a byte by byte basis.
            Even if the strings contain an even number of characters, you cannot use
            the cmpsw instruction. It does not compare strings in lexicographical
            order.
        •   The cx register must be loaded with the length of the smaller string.
        •   Use the repe prefix.
        •   The ds:si and es:di registers must point at the very first character in the
            two strings you want to compare.

    After the execution of the cmps instruction, if the two strings were equal, their lengths
must be compared in order to finish the comparison. The following code compares a cou-
ple of character strings:
                    lea        si, source
                    lea        di, dest
                    mov        cx, lengthSource
                    mov        ax, lengthDest
                    cmp        cx, ax
                    ja         NoSwap
                    xchg       ax, cx
NoSwap: repe        cmpsb
                    jne        NotEqual
                    mov        ax, lengthSource
                    cmp        ax, lengthDest
NotEqual:

If you’re using bytes to hold the string lengths, you should adjust this code appropriately.
     You can also use the cmps instruction to compare multi-word integer values (that is,
extended precision integer values). Because of the amount of setup required for a string
comparison, this isn’t practical for integer values less than three or four words in length,
but for large integer values, it’s an excellent way to compare such values. Unlike character
strings, we cannot compare integer strings using a lexicographical ordering. When com-
paring strings, we compare the characters from the least significant byte to the most sig-
nificant byte. When comparing integers, we must compare the values from the most
significant byte (or word/double word) down to the least significant byte, word or double
word. So, to compare two eight-word (128-bit) integer values, use the following code on
the 80286:
                    std
                    lea        si, SourceInteger+14
                    lea        di, DestInteger+14
                    mov        cx, 8
        repe        cmpsw

    This code compares the integers from their most significant word down to the least
significant word. The cmpsw instruction finishes when the two values are unequal or upon
decrementing cx to zero (implying that the two values are equal). Once again, the flags
provide the result of the comparison.


                                                                                     Page 827
Chapter 15

                     The repne prefix will instruct the cmps instruction to compare successive string ele-
                ments as long as they do not match. The 80x86 flags are of little use after the execution of
                this instruction. Either the cx register is zero (in which case the two strings are totally dif-
                ferent), or it contains the number of elements compared in the two strings until a match.
                While this form of the cmps instruction isn’t particularly useful for comparing strings, it is
                useful for locating the first pair of matching items in a couple of byte or word arrays. In
                general, though, you’ll rarely use the repne prefix with cmps.
                    One last thing to keep in mind with using the cmps instruction – the value in the cx
                register determines the number of elements to process, not the number of bytes. There-
                fore, when using cmpsw, cx specifies the number of words to compare. This, of course, is
                twice the number of bytes to compare.


15.1.6       The SCAS Instruction

                    The cmps instruction compares two strings against one another. You cannot use it to
                search for a particular element within a string. For example, you could not use the cmps
                instruction to quickly scan for a zero throughout some other string. You can use the scas
                (scan string) instruction for this task.
                     Unlike the movs and cmps instructions, the scas instruction only requires a destination
                string (es:di) rather than both a source and destination string. The source operand is the
                value in the al (scasb), ax (scasw), or eax (scasd) register.
                     The scas instruction, by itself, compares the value in the accumulator (al, ax, or eax)
                against the value pointed at by es:di and then increments (or decrements) di by one, two,
                or four. The CPU sets the flags according to the result of the comparison. While this might
                be useful on occasion, scas is a lot more useful when using the repe and repne prefixes.
                    When the repe prefix (repeat while equal) is present, scas scans the string searching
                for an element which does not match the value in the accumulator. When using the repne
                prefix (repeat while not equal), scas scans the string searching for the first string element
                which is equal to the value in the accumulator.
                     You’re probably wondering “why do these prefixes do exactly the opposite of what
                they ought to do?” The paragraphs above haven’t quite phrased the operation of the scas
                instruction properly. When using the repe prefix with scas, the 80x86 scans through the
                string while the value in the accumulator is equal to the string operand. This is equivalent
                to searching through the string for the first element which does not match the value in the
                accumulator. The scas instruction with repne scans through the string while the accumula-
                tor is not equal to the string operand. Of course, this form searches for the first value in the
                string which matches the value in the accumulator register. The scas instruction takes the
                following forms:
                        {REPE}      SCASB
                        {REPE}      SCASW
                        {REPE}      SCASD         ;Available only on 80386 and later processors
                        {REPE}      SCAS        dest
                        {REPNE}     SCASB
                        {REPNE}     SCASW
                        {REPNE}     SCASD         ;Available only on 80386 and later processors
                        {REPNE}     SCAS        dest

                     Like the cmps and movs instructions, the value in the cx register specifies the number
                of elements to process, not bytes, when using a repeat prefix.


15.1.7       The STOS Instruction

                    The stos instruction stores the value in the accumulator at the location specified by
                es:di. After storing the value, the CPU increments or decrements di depending upon the
                state of the direction flag. Although the stos instruction has many uses, its primary use is

Page 828
                                                                                         Strings and Character Sets

                to initialize arrays and strings to a constant value. For example, if you have a 256-byte
                array you want to clear out with zeros, use the following code:
                ; Presumably, the ES register already points at the segment
                ; containing DestString
                                      cld
                                      lea        di, DestString
                                      mov        cx, 128                       ;256 bytes is 128 words.
                                      xor        ax, ax                        ;AX := 0
                         rep          stosw

                    This code writes 128 words rather than 256 bytes because a single stosw operation is
                faster than two stosb operations. On an 80386 or later this code could have written 64 dou-
                ble words to accomplish the same thing even faster.
                     The stos instruction takes four forms. They are
                         {REP}        STOSB
                         {REP}        STOSW
                         {REP}        STOSD
                         {REP}        STOS       dest

                    The stosb instruction stores the value in the al register into the specified memory loca-
                tion(s), the stosw instruction stores the ax register into the specified memory location(s)
                and the stosd instruction stores eax into the specified location(s). The stos instruction is
                either an stosb, stosw, or stosd instruction depending upon the size of the specified oper-
                and.
                   Keep in mind that the stos instruction is useful only for initializing a byte, word, or
                dword array to a constant value. If you need to initialize an array to different values, you
                cannot use the stos instruction. You can use movs in such a situation, see the exercises for
                additional details.


15.1.8     The LODS Instruction

                     The lods instruction is unique among the string instructions. You will never use a
                repeat prefix with this instruction. The lods instruction copies the byte or word pointed at
                by ds:si into the al, ax, or eax register, after which it increments or decrements the si register
                by one, two, or four. Repeating this instruction via the repeat prefix would serve no pur-
                pose whatsoever since the accumulator register will be overwritten each time the lods
                instruction repeats. At the end of the repeat operation, the accumulator will contain the
                last value read from memory.
                     Instead, use the lods instruction to fetch bytes (lodsb), words (lodsw), or double words
                (lodsd) from memory for further processing. By using the stos instruction, you can synthe-
                size powerful string operations.
                     Like the stos instruction, the lods instruction takes four forms:
                         {REP}        LODSB
                         {REP}        LODSW
                         {REP}        LODSD                       ;Available only on 80386 and later
                         {REP}        LODS       dest

                     As mentioned earlier, you’ll rarely, if ever, use the rep prefixes with these instructions3.
                The 80x86 increments or decrements si by one, two, or four depending on the direction
                flag and whether you’re using the lodsb, lodsw, or lodsd instruction.




   3. They appear here simply because they are allowed. They’re not useful, but they are allowed.


                                                                                                         Page 829
Chapter 15


15.1.9       Building Complex String Functions from LODS and STOS

                    The 80x86 supports only five different string instructions: movs, cmps, scas, lods, and
                stos4. These certainly aren’t the only string operations you’ll ever want to use. However,
                you can use the lods and stos instructions to easily generate any particular string operation
                you like. For example, suppose you wanted a string operation that converts all the upper
                case characters in a string to lower case. You could use the following code:
                ; Presumably, ES and DS have been set up to point at the same
                ; segment, the one containing the string to convert.

                                     lea        si, String2Convert
                                     mov        di, si
                                     mov        cx, LengthOfString
                Convert2Lower:       lodsb                                 ;Get next char in str.
                                     cmp        al, ‘A’                    ;Is it upper case?
                                     jb         NotUpper
                                     cmp        al, ‘Z’
                                     ja         NotUpper
                                     or         al, 20h                    ;Convert to lower case.
                NotUpper:            stosb                                 ;Store into destination.
                                     loop       Convert2Lower

                    Assuming you’re willing to waste 256 bytes for a table, this conversion operation can
                be sped up somewhat using the xlat instruction:
                ; Presumably, ES and DS have been set up to point at the same
                ; segment, the one containing the string to be converted.
                                     cld
                                     lea        si,   String2Convert
                                     mov        di,   si
                                     mov        cx,   LengthOfString
                                     lea        bx,   ConversionTable
                Convert2Lower:       lodsb                                 ;Get next char in str.
                                     xlat                                  ;Convert as appropriate.
                                     stosb                                 ;Store into destination.
                                     loop       Convert2Lower

                    The conversion table, of course, would contain the index into the table at each location
                except at offsets 41h..5Ah. At these locations the conversion table would contain the val-
                ues 61h..7Ah (i.e., at indexes ‘A’..’Z’ the table would contain the codes for ‘a’..’z’).
                    Since the lods and stos instructions use the accumulator as an intermediary, you can
                use any accumulator operation to quickly manipulate string elements.


15.1.10 Prefixes and the String Instructions

                     The string instructions will accept segment prefixes, lock prefixes, and repeat prefixes.
                In fact, you can specify all three types of instruction prefixes should you so desire. How-
                ever, due to a bug in the earlier 80x86 chips (pre-80386), you should never use more than a
                single prefix (repeat, lock, or segment override) on a string instruction unless your code
                will only run on later processors; a likely event these days. If you absolutely must use two
                or more prefixes and need to run on an earlier processor, make sure you turn off the inter-
                rupts while executing the string instruction.




    4. Not counting INS and OUTS which we’re ignoring here.


Page 830
                                                                                       Strings and Character Sets


15.2     Character Strings
                     Since you’ll encounter character strings more often than other types of strings, they
                 deserve special attention. The following sections describe character strings and various
                 types of string operations.


15.2.1     Types of Strings

                      At the most basic level, the 80x86’s string instruction only operate upon arrays of
                 characters. However, since most string data types contain an array of characters as a com-
                 ponent, the 80x86’s string instructions are handy for manipulating that portion of the
                 string.
                      Probably the biggest difference between a character string and an array of characters
                 is the length attribute. An array of characters contains a fixed number of characters. Never
                 any more, never any less. A character string, however, has a dynamic run-time length, that
                 is, the number of characters contained in the string at some point in the program. Charac-
                 ter strings, unlike arrays of characters, have the ability to change their size during execu-
                 tion (within certain limits, of course).
                      To complicate things even more, there are two generic types of strings: statically allo-
                 cated strings and dynamically allocated strings. Statically allocated strings are given a
                 fixed, maximum length at program creation time. The length of the string may vary at
                 run-time, but only between zero and this maximum length. Most systems allocate and
                 deallocate dynamically allocated strings in a memory pool when using strings. Such
                 strings may be any length (up to some reasonable maximum value). Accessing such
                 strings is less efficient than accessing statically allocated strings. Furthermore, garbage
                 collection5 may take additional time. Nevertheless, dynamically allocated strings are
                 much more space efficient than statically allocated strings and, in some instances, access-
                 ing dynamically allocated strings is faster as well. Most of the examples in this chapter
                 will use statically allocated strings.
                     A string with a dynamic length needs some way of keeping track of this length. While
                 there are several possible ways to represent string lengths, the two most popular are
                 length-prefixed strings and zero-terminated strings. A length-prefixed string consists of a
                 single byte or word that contains the length of that string. Immediately following this
                 length value, are the characters that make up the string. Assuming the use of byte prefix
                 lengths, you could define the string “HELLO” as follows:
                 HelloStr              byte        5,”HELLO”

                     Length-prefixed strings are often called Pascal strings since this is the type of string
                 variable supported by most versions of Pascal6.
                     Another popular way to specify string lengths is to use zero-terminated strings. A
                 zero-terminated string consists of a string of characters terminated with a zero byte. These
                 types of strings are often called C-strings since they are the type used by the C/C++ pro-
                 gramming language. The UCR Standard Library, since it mimics the C standard library,
                 also uses zero-terminated strings.
                      Pascal strings are much better than C/C++ strings for several reasons. First, comput-
                 ing the length of a Pascal string is trivial. You need only fetch the first byte (or word) of the
                 string and you’ve got the length of the string. Computing the length of a C/C++ string is
                 considerably less efficient. You must scan the entire string (e.g., using the scasb instruc-
                 tion) for a zero byte. If the C/C++ string is long, this can take a long time. Furthermore,
                 C/C++ strings cannot contain the NULL character. On the other hand, C/C++ strings can
                 be any length, yet require only a single extra byte of overhead. Pascal strings, however,

   5. Reclaiming unused storage.
   6. At least those versions of Pascal which support strings.


                                                                                                        Page 831
Chapter 15

                can be no longer than 255 characters when using only a single length byte. For strings
                longer than 255 bytes, you’ll need two bytes to hold the length for a Pascal string. Since
                most strings are less than 256 characters in length, this isn’t much of a disadvantage.
                    An advantage of zero-terminated strings is that they are easy to use in an assembly
                language program. This is particularly true of strings that are so long they require multi-
                ple source code lines in your assembly language programs. Counting up every character
                in a string is so tedious that it’s not even worth considering. However, you can write a
                macro which will easily build Pascal strings for you:
                PString             macro     String
                                    local     StringLength, StringStart
                                    byte      StringLength
                StringStart         byte      String
                StringLength        =         $-StringStart
                                    endm
                                     .
                                     .
                                     .
                                    PString      “This string has a length prefix”

                As long as the string fits entirely on one source line, you can use this macro to generate
                Pascal style strings.
                    Common string functions like concatenation, length, substring, index, and others are
                much easier to write when using length-prefixed strings. So we’ll use Pascal strings unless
                otherwise noted. Furthermore, the UCR Standard library provides a large number of
                C/C++ string functions, so there is no need to replicate those functions here.


15.2.2       String Assignment

                     You can easily assign one string to another using the movsb instruction. For example,
                if you want to assign the length-prefixed string String1 to String2, use the following:
                ; Presumably, ES and DS are set up already

                                    lea       si,   String1
                                    lea       di,   String2
                                    mov       ch,   0                     ;Extend len to 16 bits.
                                    mov       cl,   String1               ;Get string length.
                                    inc       cx                          ;Include length byte.
                          rep       movsb

                This code increments cx by one before executing movsb because the length byte contains
                the length of the string exclusive of the length byte itself.
                    Generally, string variables can be initialized to constants by using the PString macro
                described earlier. However, if you need to set a string variable to some constant value, you
                can write a StrAssign subroutine which assigns the string immediately following the call.
                The following procedure does exactly that:
                                    include    stdlib.a
                                    includelib stdlib.lib

                cseg                segment   para public ‘code’
                                    assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg, es:dseg, ss:sseg

                ; String assignment procedure

                MainPgm             proc      far
                                    mov       ax, seg dseg
                                    mov       ds, ax
                                    mov       es, ax

                                    lea       di, ToString
                                    call      StrAssign
                                    byte      “This is an example of how the “


Page 832
                                                             Strings and Character Sets

                  byte      “StrAssign routine is used”,0
                  nop
                  ExitPgm
MainPgm           endp

StrAssign         proc      near
                  push      bp
                  mov       bp, sp
                  pushf
                  push      ds
                  push      si
                  push      di
                  push      cx
                  push      ax
                  push      di             ;Save again for use later.
                  push      es
                  cld

; Get the address of the source string

                  mov       ax,   cs
                  mov       es,   ax
                  mov       di,   2[bp]    ;Get return address.
                  mov       cx,   0ffffh   ;Scan for as long as it takes.
                  mov       al,   0        ;Scan for a zero.
          repne   scasb                    ;Compute the length of string.
                  neg       cx             ;Convert length to a positive #.
                  dec       cx             ;Because we started with -1, not 0.
                  dec       cx             ;skip zero terminating byte.

; Now copy the strings

                  pop       es             ;Get destination segment.
                  pop       di             ;Get destination address.
                  mov       al, cl         ;Store length byte.
                  stosb

; Now copy the source string.

                  mov       ax, cs
                  mov       ds, ax
                  mov       si, 2[bp]
          rep     movsb

; Update the return address and leave:

                  inc       si             ;Skip over zero byte.
                  mov       2[bp], si

                  pop       ax
                  pop       cx
                  pop       di
                  pop       si
                  pop       ds
                  popf
                  pop       bp
                  ret
StrAssign         endp

cseg              ends

dseg              segment para public ‘data’
ToString          byte     255 dup (0)
dseg              ends

sseg              segment para stack ‘stack’
                  word     256 dup (?)
sseg              ends
                  end      MainPgm



                                                                             Page 833
Chapter 15

                     This code uses the scas instruction to determine the length of the string immediately
                following the call instruction. Once the code determines the length, it stores this length
                into the first byte of the destination string and then copies the text following the call to the
                string variable. After copying the string, this code adjusts the return address so that it
                points just beyond the zero terminating byte. Then the procedure returns control to the
                caller.
                    Of course, this string assignment procedure isn’t very efficient, but it’s very easy to
                use. Setting up es:di is all that you need to do to use this procedure. If you need fast string
                assignment, simply use the movs instruction as follows:
                ; Presumably, DS and ES have already been set up.

                                    lea           si, SourceString
                                    lea           di, DestString
                                    mov           cx, LengthSource
                        rep         movsb
                                      .
                                      .
                                      .
                SourceString        byte          LengthSource-1
                                    byte          “This is an example of how the “
                                    byte          “StrAssign routine is used”
                LengthSource        =             $-SourceString

                DestString          byte          256 dup (?)

                    Using in-line instructions requires considerably more setup (and typing!), but it is
                much faster than the StrAssign procedure. If you don’t like the typing, you can always
                write a macro to do the string assignment for you.


15.2.3       String Comparison

                    Comparing two character strings was already beaten to death in the section on the
                cmps instruction. Other than providing some concrete examples, there is no reason to con-
                sider this subject any further.
                   Note: all the following examples assume that es and ds are pointing at the proper seg-
                ments containing the destination and source strings.
                    Comparing Str1 to Str2:
                                    lea           si, Str1
                                    lea           di, Str2

                ; Get the minimum length of the two strings.

                                    mov           al, Str1
                                    mov           cl, al
                                    cmp           al, Str2
                                    jb            CmpStrs
                                    mov           cl, Str2

                ; Compare the two strings.

                CmpStrs:            mov           ch, 0
                                    cld
                        repe        cmpsb
                                    jne           StrsNotEqual

                ; If CMPS thinks they’re equal, compare their lengths
                ; just to be sure.

                                    cmp           al, Str2
                StrsNotEqual:




Page 834
                                                                                       Strings and Character Sets

                   At label StrsNotEqual, the flags will contain all the pertinent information about the
               ranking of these two strings. You can use the conditional jump instructions to test the
               result of this comparison.



15.3     Character String Functions
                    Most high level languages, like Pascal, BASIC, “C”, and PL/I, provide several string
               functions and procedures (either built into the language or as part of a standard library).
               Other than the five string operations provided above, the 80x86 doesn’t support any
               string functions. Therefore, if you need a particular string function, you’ll have to write it
               yourself. The following sections describe many of the more popular string functions and
               how to implement them in assembly language.


15.3.1     Substr

                   The Substr (substring) function copies a portion of one string to another. In a high level
               language, this function usually takes the form:
                        DestStr := Substr(SrcStr,Index,Length);

               where:
                        •   DestStr is the name of the string variable where you want to store the sub-
                            string,
                        •   SrcStr is the name of the source string (from which the substring is to be
                            taken),
                        •   Index is the starting character position within the string (1..length(SrcStr)),
                            and
                        •   Length is the length of the substring you want to copy into DestStr.

                    The following examples show how Substr works.
                                    SrcStr := ‘This is an example of a string’;
                                    DestStr := Substr(SrcStr,11,7);
                                    write(DestStr);

               This prints ‘example’. The index value is eleven, so, the Substr function will begin copying
               data starting at the eleventh character in the string. The eleventh character is the ‘e’ in
               ‘example’. The length of the string is seven.
                    This invocation copies the seven characters ‘example’ to DestStr.
                                    SrcStr := ‘This is an example of a string’;
                                    DestStr := Substr(SrcStr,1,10);
                                    write(DestStr);

               This prints ‘This is an’. Since the index is one, this occurrence of the Substr function starts
               copying 10 characters starting with the first character in the string.
                                    SrcStr := ‘This is an example of a string’;
                                    DestStr := Substr(SrcStr,20,11);
                                    write(DestStr);

               This prints ‘of a string’. This call to Substr extracts the last eleven characters in the string.
                    What happens if the index and length values are out of bounds? For example, what
               happens if Index is zero or is greater than the length of the string? What happens if Index is
               fine, but the sum of Index and Length is greater than the length of the source string? You
               can handle these abnormal situations in one of three ways: (1)ignore the possibility of
               error; (2)abort the program with a run-time error; (3)process some reasonable number of
               characters in response to the request.



                                                                                                        Page 835
Chapter 15

                 The first solution operates under the assumption that the caller never makes a mistake
             computing the values for the parameters to the Substr function. It blindly assumes that the
             values passed to the Substr function are correct and processes the string based on that
             assumption. This can produce some bizarre effects. Consider the following examples,
             which use length-prefixed strings:
                                 SourceStr :=’1234567890ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ’;
                                 DestStr := Substr(SourceStr,0,5);
                                 Write(‘DestStr’);

             prints ‘$1234’. The reason, of course, is that SourceStr is a length-prefixed string. Therefore
             the length, 36, appears at offset zero within the string. If Substr uses the illegal index of
             zero then the length of the string will be returned as the first character. In this particular
             case, the length of the string, 36, just happened to correspond to the ASCII code for the ‘$’
             character.
                 The situation is considerably worse if the value specified for Index is negative or is
             greater than the length of the string. In such a case, the Substr function would be returning
             a substring containing characters appearing before or after the source string. This is not a
             reasonable result.
                 Despite the problems with ignoring the possibility of error in the Substr function, there
             is one big advantage to processing substrings in this manner: the resulting Substr code is
             more efficient if it doesn’t have to perform any run-time checking on the data. If you know
             that the index and length values are always within an acceptable range, then there is no
             need to do this checking within Substr function. If you can guarantee that an error will not
             occur, your programs will run (somewhat) faster by eliminating the run-time check.
                 Since most programs are rarely error-free, you’re taking a big gamble if you assume
             that all calls to the Substr routine are passing reasonable values. Therefore, some sort of
             run-time check is often necessary to catch errors in your program. An error occurs under
             the following conditions:
                     •   The index parameter (Index) is less than one.
                     •   Index is greater than the length of the string.
                     •   The Substr length parameter (Length) is greater than the length of the
                         string.
                     •   The sum of Index and Length is greater than the length of the string.

                 An alternative to ignoring any of these errors is to abort with an error message. This is
             probably fine during the program development phase, but once your program is in the
             hands of users it could be a real disaster. Your customers wouldn’t be very happy if they’d
             spent all day entering data into a program and it aborted, causing them to lose the data
             they’ve entered. An alternative to aborting when an error occurs is to have the Substr func-
             tion return an error condition. Then leave it up to the calling code to determine if an error
             has occurred. This technique works well with the third alternative to handling errors: pro-
             cessing the substring as best you can.
                  The third alternative, handling the error as best you can, is probably the best alterna-
             tive. Handle the error conditions in the following manner:
                     •   The index parameter (Index) is less than one. There are two ways to han-
                         dle this error condition. One way is to automatically set the Index parame-
                         ter to one and return the substring beginning with the first character of
                         the source string. The other alternative is to return the empty string, a
                         string of length zero, as the substring. Variations on this theme are also
                         possible. You might return the substring beginning with the first charac-
                         ter if the index is zero and an empty string if the index is negative.
                         Another alternative is to use unsigned numbers. Then you’ve only got to
                         worry about the case where Index is zero. A negative number, should the
                         calling code accidentally generate one, would look like a large positive
                         number.



Page 836
                                                                        Strings and Character Sets

          •   The index is greater than the length of the string. If this is the case, then
              the Substr function should return an empty string. Intuitively, this is the
              proper response in this situation.
          •   The Substr length parameter (Length) is greater than the length of the
              string. -or-
          •   The sum of Index and Length is greater than the length of the string. Points
              three and four are the same problem, the length of the desired substring
              extends beyond the end of the source string. In this event, Substr should
              return the substring consisting of those characters starting at Index
              through the end of the source string.

     The following code for the Substr function expects four parameters: the addresses of
the source and destination strings, the starting index, and the length of the desired sub-
string. Substr expects the parameters in the following registers:
    ds:si-                 The address of the source string.
    es:di-                 The address of the destination string.
    ch-                    The starting index.
    cl-                    The length of the substring.
Substr returns the following values:
          •   The substring, at location es:di.
          •   Substr clears the carry flag if there were no errors. Substr sets the carry flag
              if there was an error.
          •   Substr preserves all the registers.

    If an error occurs, then the calling code must examine the values in si, di and cx to
determine the exact cause of the error (if this is necessary). In the event of an error, the
Substr function returns the following substrings:
          •   If the Index parameter (ch) is zero, Substr uses one instead.
          •   The Index and Length parameters are both unsigned byte values, therefore
              they are never negative.
          •   If the Index parameter is greater than the length of the source string, Substr
              returns an empty string.
          •   If the sum of the Index and Length parameters is greater than the length of
              the source string, Substr returns only those characters from Index through
              the end of the source string. The following code realizes the substring
              function.

; Substring function.
;
; HLL form:
;
;procedure substring(var Src:string;
;                          Index, Length:integer;
;                          var Dest:string);
;
; Src- Address of a source string.
; Index- Index into the source string.
; Length- Length of the substring to extract.
; Dest- Address of a destination string.
;
; Copies the source string from address [Src+index] of length
; Length to the destination string.
;
; If an error occurs, the carry flag is returned set, otherwise
; clear.
;
; Parameters are passed as follows:
;
; DS:SI- Source string address.
; ES:DI- Destination string address.

                                                                                         Page 837
Chapter 15

               ;   CH- Index into source string.
               ;   CL- Length of source string.
               ;
               ;   Note: the strings pointed at by the SI and DI registers are
               ;   length-prefixed strings. That is, the first byte of each
               ;   string contains the length of that string.

               Substring          proc       near
                                  push       ax
                                  push       cx
                                  push       di
                                  push       si
                                  clc                       ;Assume no error.
                                  pushf                     ;Save direction flag status.

               ; Check the validity of the parameters.

                                  cmp        ch, [si]       ;Is index beyond the length of
                                  ja         ReturnEmpty    ; the source string?
                                  mov        al, ch         ;See if the sum of index and
                                  dec        al             ; length is beyond the end of the
                                  add        al, cl         ; string.
                                  jc         TooLong        ;Error if > 255.
                                  cmp        al, [si]       ;Beyond the length of the source?
                                  jbe        OkaySoFar

               ; If the substring isn’t completely contained within the source
               ; string, truncate it:

               TooLong:           popf
                                  stc                       ;Return an error flag.
                                  pushf
                                  mov        al, [si]       ;Get maximum length.
                                  sub        al, ch         ;Subtract index value.
                                  inc        al             ;Adjust as appropriate.
                                  mov        cl, al         ;Save as new length.

               OkaySoFar:         mov        es:[di], cl    ;Save destination string length.
                                  inc        di
                                  mov        al, ch         ;Get index into source.
                                  mov        ch, 0          ;Zero extend length value into CX.
                                  mov        ah, 0          ;Zero extend index into AX.
                                  add        si, ax         ;Compute address of substring.
                                  cld
                        rep       movsb                     ;Copy the substring.

                                  popf
               SubStrDone:        pop        si
                                  pop        di
                                  pop        cx
                                  pop        ax
                                  ret

               ; Return an empty string here:

               ReturnEmpty:       mov        byte ptr es:[di], 0
                                  popf
                                  stc
                                  jmp        SubStrDone
               SubString          endp



15.3.2       Index

                  The Index string function searches for the first occurrence of one string within another
               and returns the offset to that occurrence. Consider the following HLL form:




Page 838
                                                                                    Strings and Character Sets

                       SourceStr := ‘Hello world’;
                       TestStr := ‘world’;
                       I := INDEX(SourceStr, TestStr);

                 The Index function scans through the source string looking for the first occurrence of
             the test string. If found, it returns the index into the source string where the test string
             begins. In the example above, the Index function would return seven since the substring
             ‘world’ starts at the seventh character position in the source string.
                 The only possible error occurs if Index cannot find the test string in the source string.
             In such a situation, most implementations return zero. Our version will do likewise. The
             Index function which follows operates in the following fashion:
                  1) It compares the length of the test string to the length of the source string. If the test
             string is longer, Index immediately returns zero since there is no way the test string will be
             found in the source string in this situation.
                 2) The index function operates as follows:
                       i := 1;
                       while (i < (length(source)-length(test)) and
                                  test <> substr(source, i, length(test)) do
                                             i := i+1;

                 When this loop terminates, if (i < length(source)-length(test)) then it contains the
             index into source where test begins. Otherwise test is not a substring of source. Using the
             previous example, this loop compares test to source in the following manner:
             i=1
             test:                world                                    No match
             source:              Hello world

             i=2
             test:                 world                                   No match
             source:              Hello world

             i=3
             test:                  world                                  No match
             source:              Hello world

             i=4
             test:                   world                                 No match
             source:              Hello world

             i=5
             test:                    world                                No match
             source:              Hello world

             i=6
             test:                     world                               No match
             source:              Hello world

             i=7
             test:                      world                              Match
             source:              Hello world

                 There are (algorithmically) better ways to do this comparison7, however, the algo-
             rithm above lends itself to the use of 80x86 string instructions and is very easy to under-
             stand. Index’s code follows:

             ; INDEX- computes the offset of one string within another.
             ;
             ; On entry:
             ;

7. The interested reader should look up the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm in “Data Structure Techniques” by Tho-
mas A. Standish. The Boyer-Moore algorithm is another fast string search routine, although somewhat more com-
plex.


                                                                                                     Page 839
Chapter 15

               ;   ES:DI-                     Points at the    test string that INDEX will search for
               ;                              in the source    string.
               ;   DS:SI-                     Points at the    source string which (presumably)
               ;                               contains the    string INDEX is searching for.
               ;
               ;   On exit:
               ;
               ;   AX-                        Contains the offset into the source string where the
               ;                              test string was found.

               INDEX               proc       near
                                   push       si
                                   push       di
                                   push       bx
                                   push       cx
                                   pushf                      ;Save direction flag value.
                                   cld

                                   mov        al, es:[di]     ;Get the length of the test string.
                                   cmp        al, [si]        ;See if it is longer than the length
                                   ja         NotThere        ; of the source string.

               ; Compute the index of the last character we need to compare the
               ; test string against in the source string.

                                   mov        al,   es:[di]   ;Length of test string.
                                   mov        cl,   al        ;Save for later.
                                   mov        ch,   0
                                   sub        al,   [si]      ;Length of source string.
                                   mov        bl,   al        ;# of times to repeat loop.
                                   inc        di              ;Skip over length byte.
                                   xor        ax,   ax        ;Init index to zero.
               CmpLoop:            inc        ax              ;Bump index by one.
                                   inc        si              ;Move on to the next char in source.
                                   push       si              ;Save string pointers and the
                                   push       di              ; length of the test string.
                                   push       cx
                         rep       cmpsb                      ;Compare the strings.
                                   pop        cx              ;Restore string pointers
                                   pop        di              ; and length.
                                   pop        si
                                   je         Foundindex      ;If we found the substring.
                                   dec        bl
                                   jnz        CmpLoop         ;Try next entry in source string.

               ; If we fall down here, the test string doesn’t appear inside the
               ; source string.

               NotThere:           xor        ax, ax          ;Return INDEX = 0

               ; If the substring was found in the loop above, remove the
               ; garbage left on the stack

               FoundIndex:         popf
                                   pop        cx
                                   pop        bx
                                   pop        di
                                   pop        si
                                   ret
               INDEX               endp




15.3.3       Repeat

                  The Repeat string function expects three parameters– the address of a string, a length,
               and a character. It constructs a string of the specified length containing “length” copies of



Page 840
                                                                                 Strings and Character Sets

            the specified character. For example, Repeat(STR,5,’*’) stores the string ‘*****’ into the STR
            string variable. This is a very easy string function to write, thanks to the stosb instruction:


            ;    REPEAT-                    Constructs a string of length CX where each element
            ;                               is initialized to the character passed in AL.
            ;
            ;    On entry:
            ;
            ;    ES:DI-                     Points at the string to be constructed.
            ;    CX-                        Contains the length of the string.
            ;    AL-                        Contains the character with which each element of
            ;                               the string is to be initialized.

            REPEAT                 proc     near
                                   push     di
                                   push     ax
                                   push     cx
                                   pushf                    ;Save direction flag value.
                                   cld
                                   mov      es:[di], cl     ;Save string length.
                                   mov      ch, 0           ;Just in case.
                                   inc      di              ;Start string at next location.
                      rep          stosb
                                   popf
                                   pop      cx
                                   pop      ax
                                   pop      di
                                   ret
            REPEAT                 endp



15.3.4   Insert

                 The Insert string function inserts one string into another. It expects three parameters, a
            source string, a destination string, and an index. Insert inserts the source string into the
            destination string starting at the offset specified by the index parameter. HLLs usually call
            the Insert procedure as follows:
                                   source := ‘ there’;
                                   dest := ‘Hello world’;
                                   INSERT(source,dest,6);

                 The call to Insert above would change source to contain the string ‘Hello there world’.
            It does this by inserting the string ‘ there’ before the sixth character in ‘Hello world’.
                  The insert procedure using the following algorithm:
                  Insert(Src,dest,index);
            1)        Move the characters from location dest+index through the end of the destination
                      string length (Src) bytes up in memory.
            2)        Copy the characters from the Src string to location dest+index.
            3)        Adjust the length of the destination string so that it is the sum of the destination
                      and source lengths. The following code implements this algorithm:

            ;    INSERT- Inserts one string into another.
            ;
            ;    On entry:
            ;
            ;    DS:SI Points at the source string to be inserted
            ;
            ;    ES:DI Points at the destination string into which the source
            ;    string will be inserted.
            ;
            ;    DX Contains the offset into the destination string where the


                                                                                                  Page 841
Chapter 15

             ; source string is to be inserted.
             ;
             ;
             ; All registers are preserved.
             ;
             ; Error condition-
             ;
             ; If the length of the newly created string is greater than 255,
             ; the insert operation will not be performed and the carry flag
             ; will be returned set.
             ;
             ; If the index is greater than the length of the destination
             ; string,
             ; then the source string will be appended to the end of the destin- ; ation
             string.

             INSERT           proc     near
                              push     si
                              push     di
                              push     dx
                              push     cx
                              push     bx
                              push     ax
                              clc                     ;Assume no error.
                              pushf
                              mov      dh, 0          ;Just to be safe.

             ; First, see if the new string will be too long.

                              mov      ch, 0
                              mov      ah, ch
                              mov      bh, ch
                              mov      al, es:[di]    ;AX = length of dest string.
                              mov      cl, [si]       ;CX = length of source string.
                              mov      bl, al         ;BX = length of new string.
                              add      bl, cl
                              jc       TooLong        ;Abort if too long.
                              mov      es:[di], bl    ;Update length.

             ; See if the index value is too large:

                              cmp      dl, al
                              jbe      IndexIsOK
                              mov      dl, al
             IndexIsOK:

             ; Now, make room for the string that’s about to be inserted.

                              push     si             ;Save for later.
                              push     cx

                              mov      si, di         ;Point SI at the end of current
                              add      si, ax         ; destination string.
                              add      di, bx         ;Point DI at the end of new str.
                              std
                      rep     movsb                   ;Open up space for new string.

             ; Now, copy the source string into the space opened up.

                              pop      cx
                              pop      si
                              add      si, cx         ;Point at end of source string.
                      rep     movsb
                              jmp      INSERTDone

             TooLong:         popf
                              stc
                              pushf

             INSERTDone:      popf


Page 842
                                                                                  Strings and Character Sets

                                    pop       ax
                                    pop       bx
                                    pop       cx
                                    pop       dx
                                    pop       di
                                    pop       si
                                    ret
            INSERT                  endp



15.3.5   Delete

                The Delete string removes characters from a string. It expects three parameters – the
            address of a string, an index into that string, and the number of characters to remove from
            that string. A HLL call to Delete usually takes the form:
                                    Delete(Str,index,length);

            For example,
                                    Str := ‘Hello there world’;
                                    Delete(str,7,6);

               This call to Delete will leave str containing ‘Hello world’. The algorithm for the delete
            operation is the following:
             1)          Subtract the length parameter value from the length of the destination string and
                         update the length of the destination string with this new value.
            2)           Copy any characters following the deleted substring over the top of the deleted
                         substring.
                 There are a couple of errors that may occur when using the delete procedure. The
            index value could be zero or larger than the size of the specified string. In this case, the
            Delete procedure shouldn’t do anything to the string. If the sum of the index and length
            parameters is greater than the length of the string, then the Delete procedure should delete
            all the characters to the end of the string. The following code implements the Delete proce-
            dure:


            ;    DELETE - removes some substring from a string.
            ;
            ;    On entry:
            ;
            ;    DS:SI                        Points at the source string.
            ;    DX                           Index into the string of the start of the substring
            ;                                 to delete.
            ;    CX                           Length of the substring to be deleted.
            ;
            ;    Error conditions-
            ;
            ;    If DX is greater than the length of the string, then the
            ;    operation is aborted.
            ;
            ;    If DX+CX is greater than the length of the string, DELETE only
            ;    deletes those characters from DX through the end of the string.

            DELETE                  proc      near
                                    push      es
                                    push      si
                                    push      di
                                    push      ax
                                    push      cx
                                    push      dx
                                    pushf                    ;Save direction flag.
                                    mov       ax, ds         ;Source and destination strings
                                    mov       es, ax         ; are the same.
                                    mov       ah, 0


                                                                                                  Page 843
Chapter 15

                                     mov        dh, ah         ;Just to be safe.
                                     mov        ch, ah

                ; See if any error conditions exist.

                                     mov        al, [si]       ;Get the string length
                                     cmp        dl, al         ;Is the index too big?
                                     ja         TooBig
                                     mov        al, dl         ;Now see if INDEX+LENGTH
                                     add        al, cl         ;is too large
                                     jc         Truncate
                                     cmp        al, [si]
                                     jbe        LengthIsOK

                ; If the substring is too big, truncate it to fit.

                Truncate:            mov        cl, [si]       ;Compute maximum length
                                     sub        cl, dl
                                     inc        cl

                ; Compute the length of the new string.

                LengthIsOK:          mov        al, [si]
                                     sub        al, cl
                                     mov        [si], al

                ; Okay, now delete the specified substring.

                                     add        si, dx         ;Compute address of the substring
                                     mov        di, si         ; to be deleted, and the address of
                                     add        di, cx         ; the first character following it.
                                     cld
                          rep        movsb                     ;Delete the string.

                TooBig:              popf
                                     pop        dx
                                     pop        cx
                                     pop        ax
                                     pop        di
                                     pop        si
                                     pop        es
                                     ret
                DELETE               endp




15.3.6       Concatenation

                     The concatenation operation takes two strings and appends one to the end of the
                other. For example, Concat(‘Hello ‘,’world’) produces the string ‘Hello world’. Some high
                level languages treat concatenation as a function call, others as a procedure call. Since in
                assembly language everything is a procedure call anyway, we’ll adopt the procedural syn-
                tax. Our Concat procedure will take the following form:
                          Concat(source1,source2,dest);

                      This procedure will copy source1 to dest, then it will concatenate source2 to the end of
                dest. Concat follows:
                ;   Concat-                     Copies the string pointed at by SI to the string
                ;                               rointed at byDI and then concatenates the string;
                ;                               pointed at by BX to the destination string.
                ;
                ;   On entry-
                ;
                ;   DS:SI-                      Points at the first source string
                ;   DS:BX-                      Points at the second source string
                ;   ES:DI-                      Points at the destination string.


Page 844
                                                                                Strings and Character Sets

             ;
             ;   Error condition-
             ;
             ;   The sum of the lengths of the two strings is greater than 255.
             ;   In this event, the second string will be truncated so that the
             ;   entire string is less than 256 characters in length.

             CONCAT              proc      near
                                 push      si
                                 push      di
                                 push      cx
                                 push      ax
                                 pushf

             ; Copy the first string to the destination string:

                                 mov       al, [si]
                                 mov       cl, al
                                 mov       ch, 0
                                 mov       ah, ch
                                 add       al, [bx]       ;Compute the sum of the string’s
                                 adc       ah, 0          ; lengths.
                                 cmp       ax, 256
                                 jb        SetNewLength
                                 mov       ah, [si]       ;Save original string length.
                                 mov       al, 255        ;Fix string length at 255.
             SetNewLength:       mov       es:[di], al    ;Save new string length.
                                 inc       di             ;Skip over length bytes.
                                 inc       si
                      rep        movsb                    ;Copy source1 to dest string.

             ; If the sum of the two strings is too long, the second string
             ; must be truncated.
                                 mov       cl, [bx]     ;Get length of second string.
                                 cmp       ax, 256
                                 jb        LengthsAreOK
                                 mov       cl, ah       ;Compute truncated length.
                                 neg       cl           ;CL := 256-Length(Str1).

             LengthsAreOK:       lea       si, 1[bx]      ;Point at second string and
             ;                                            ; skip the string length.
                                 cld
                                 rep       movsb                       ;Perform the concatenation.
                                 popf
                                 pop       ax
                                 pop       cx
                                 pop       di
                                 pop       si
                                 ret
             CONCAT              endp




15.4   String Functions in the UCR Standard Library
                 The UCR Standard Library for 80x86 Assembly Language Programmers provides a
             very rich set of string functions you may use. These routines, for the most part, are quite
             similar to the string functions provided in the C Standard Library. As such, these functions
             support zero terminated strings rather than the length prefixed strings supported by the
             functions in the previous sections.
                 Because there are so many different UCR StdLib string routines and the sources for all
             these routines are in the public domain (and are present on the companion CD-ROM for
             this text), the following sections will not discuss the implementation of each routine.
             Instead, the following sections will concentrate on how to use these library routines.



                                                                                                Page 845
Chapter 15

                     The UCR library often provides several variants of the same routine. Generally a suf-
                fix of “l”, “m”, or “ml” appears at the end of the name of these variant routines. The “l”
                suffix stands for “literal constant”. Routines with the “l” (or “ml”) suffix require two
                string operands. The first is generally pointed at by es:di and the second immediate fol-
                lows the call in the code stream.
                    Most StdLib string routines operate on the specified string (or one of the strings if the
                function has two operands). The “m” (or “ml”) suffix instructs the string function to allo-
                cate storage on the heap (using malloc, hence the “m” suffix) for the new string and store
                the modified result there rather than changing the source string(s). These routines always
                return a pointer to the newly created string in the es:di registers. In the event of a memory
                allocation error (insufficient memory), these routines with the “m” or “ml” suffix return
                the carry flag set. They return the carry clear if the operation was successful.


15.4.1       StrBDel, StrBDelm

                      These two routines delete leading spaces from a string. StrBDel removes any leading
                spaces from the string pointed at by es:di. It actually modifies the source string. StrBDelm
                makes a copy of the string on the heap with any leading spaces removed. If there are no
                leading spaces, then the StrBDel routines return the original string without modification.
                Note that these routines only affect leading spaces (those appearing at the beginning of the
                string). They do not remove trailing spaces and spaces in the middle of the string. See
                Strtrim if you want to remove trailing spaces. Examples:


                MyString            byte       “    Hello there, this is my string”,0
                MyStrPtr            dword      MyString
                                     .
                                     .
                                     .
                                    les      di, MyStrPtr
                                    strbdelm       ;Creates a new string w/o leading spaces,
                                    jc       error ; pointer to string is in ES:DI on return.
                                    puts           ;Print the string pointed at by ES:DI.
                                    free           ;Deallocate storage allocated by strbdelm.
                                     .
                                     .
                                     .
                ; Note that “MyString” still contains the leading spaces.
                ; The following printf call will print the string along with
                ; those leading spaces. “strbdelm” above did not change MyString.

                                    printf
                                    byte       “MyString = ‘%s’\n”,0
                                    dword      MyString
                                     .
                                     .
                                     .
                                    les        di, MyStrPtr
                                    strbdel

                ; Now, we really have removed the leading spaces from “MyString”
                                    printf
                                    byte       “MyString = ‘%s’\n”,0
                                    dword      MyString
                                     .
                                     .
                                     .


                Output from this code fragment:
                Hello there, this is my string
                MyString = ‘   Hello there, this is my string’
                MyString = ‘Hello there, this is my string’




Page 846
                                                                                    Strings and Character Sets


15.4.2   Strcat, Strcatl, Strcatm, Strcatml

                 The strcat(xx) routines perform string concatenation. On entry, es:di points at the first
            string, and for strcat/strcatm dx:si points at the second string. For strcatl and strcatlm the sec-
            ond string follows the call in the code stream. These routines create a new string by
            appending the second string to the end of the first. In the case of strcat and strcatl, the sec-
            ond string is directly appended to the end of the first string (es:di) in memory. You must
            make sure there is sufficient memory at the end of the first string to hold the appended
            characters. Strcatm and strcatml create a new string on the heap (using malloc) holding the
            concatenated result. Examples:
            String1              byte        “Hello “,0
                                 byte        16 dup (0)                    ;Room for concatenation.

            String2              byte        “world”,0

            ; The following macro loads ES:DI with the address of the
            ; specified operand.

            lesi                 macro       operand
                                 mov         di, seg operand
                                 mov         es, di
                                 mov         di, offset operand
                                 endm

            ; The following macro loads DX:SI with the address of the
            ; specified operand.

            ldxi                 macro       operand
                                 mov         dx, seg operand
                                 mov         si, offset operand
                                 endm
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                 lesi        String1
                                 ldxi        String2
                                 strcatm                     ;Create “Hello world”
                                 jc          error           ;If insufficient memory.
                                 print
                                 byte        “strcatm: “,0
                                 puts                     ;Print “Hello world”
                                 putcr
                                 free                        ;Deallocate string storage.
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                 lesi        String1         ;Create the string
                                 strcatml                    ; “Hello there”
                                 jc          error           ;If insufficient memory.
                                 byte        “there”,0
                                 print
                                 byte        “strcatml: “,0
                                 puts                     ;Print “Hello there”
                                 putcr
                                 free
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                 lesi        String1
                                 ldxi        String2
                                 strcat                      ;Create “Hello world”
                                 printf
                                 byte        “strcat: %s\n”,0
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
            ; Note: since strcat above has actually modified String1,
            ; the following call to strcatl appends “there” to the end
            ; of the string “Hello world”.

                                 lesi        String1


                                                                                                     Page 847
Chapter 15

                                     strcatl
                                     byte       “there”,0
                                     printf
                                     byte       “strcatl: %s\n”,0
                                      .
                                      .
                                      .


                The code above produces the following output:
                strcatm: Hello world
                strcatml: Hello there
                strcat: Hello world
                strcatl: Hello world there



15.4.3       Strchr

                    Strchr searches for the first occurrence of a single character within a string. In opera-
                tion it is quite similar to the scasb instruction. However, you do not have to specify an
                explicit length when using this function as you would for scasb.
                     On entry, es:di points at the string you want to search through, al contains the value to
                search for. On return, the carry flag denotes success (C=1 means the character was not
                present in the string, C=0 means the character was present). If the character was found in
                the string, cx contains the index into the string where strchr located the character. Note
                that the first character of the string is at index zero. So strchr will return zero if al matches
                the first character of the string. If the carry flag is set, then the value in cx has no meaning.
                Example:
                ; Note that the following string has a period at location
                ; “HasPeriod+24”.

                HasPeriod            byte       “This string has a period.”,0
                                      .
                                      .
                                      .
                                     lesi       HasPeriod       ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                     mov        al, “.”         ;Search for a period.
                                     strchr
                                     jnc        GotPeriod
                                     print
                                     byte       “No period in string”,cr,lf,0
                                     jmp        Done

                ; If we found the period, output the offset into the string:

                GotPeriod:           print
                                     byte       “Found period at offset “,0
                                     mov        ax, cx
                                     puti
                                     putcr
                Done:

                This code fragment produces the output:
                Found period at offset 24



15.4.4       Strcmp, Strcmpl, Stricmp, Stricmpl

                     These routines compare strings using a lexicographical ordering. On entry to strcmp or
                stricmp, es:di points at the first string and dx:si points at the second string. Strcmp compares
                the first string to the second and returns the result of the comparison in the flags register.
                Strcmpl operates in a similar fashion, except the second string follows the call in the code
                stream. The stricmp and stricmpl routines differ from their counterparts in that they ignore
                case during the comparison. Whereas strcmp would return ‘not equal’ when comparing
                “Strcmp” with “strcmp”, the stricmp (and stricmpl) routines would return “equal” since the


Page 848
                                                                                Strings and Character Sets

            only differences are upper vs. lower case. The “i” in stricmp and stricmpl stands for “ignore
            case.” Examples:


            String1             byte       “Hello world”, 0
            String2             byte       “hello world”, 0
            String3             byte       “Hello there”, 0
                                 .
                                 .
                                 .
                                lesi       String1        ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                ldxi       String2        ;See strcat for ldxi definition.
                                strcmp
                                jae        IsGtrEql
                                printf
                                byte       “%s is less than %s\n”,0
                                dword      String1, String2
                                jmp        Tryl

            IsGtrEql:           printf
                                byte       “%s is greater or equal to %s\n”,0
                                dword      String1, String2

            Tryl:               lesi       String2
                                strcmpl
                                byte       “hi world!”,0
                                jne        NotEql
                                printf
                                byte       “Hmmm..., %s is equal to ‘hi world!’\n”,0
                                dword      String2
                                jmp        Tryi

            NotEql:             printf
                                byte       “%s is not equal to ‘hi world!’\n”,0
                                dword      String2

            Tryi:               lesi       String1
                                ldxi       String2
                                stricmp
                                jne        BadCmp
                                printf
                                byte       “Ignoring case, %s equals %s\n”,0
                                dword      String1, String2
                                jmp        Tryil

            BadCmp:             printf
                                byte       “Wow, stricmp doesn’t work! %s <> %s\n”,0
                                dword      String1, String2

            Tryil:              lesi       String2
                                stricmpl
                                byte       “hELLO THERE”,0
                                jne        BadCmp2
                                print
                                byte       “Stricmpl worked”,cr,lf,0
                                jmp        Done

            BadCmp2:            print
                                byte       “Stricmp did not work”,cr,lf,0
            Done:



15.4.5   Strcpy, Strcpyl, Strdup, Strdupl

                 The strcpy and strdup routines copy one string to another. There is no strcpym or
            strcpyml routines. Strdup and strdupl correspond to those operations. The UCR Standard
            Library uses the names strdup and strdupl rather than strcpym and strcpyml so it will use the
            same names as the C standard library.

                                                                                                Page 849
Chapter 15

                    Strcpy copies the string pointed at by es:di to the memory locations beginning at the
                address in dx:si. There is no error checking; you must ensure that there is sufficient free
                space at location dx:si before calling strcpy. Strcpy returns with es:di pointing at the destina-
                tion string (that is, the original dx:si value). Strcpyl works in a similar fashion, except the
                source string follows the call.
                     Strdup duplicates the string which es:di points at and returns a pointer to the new
                string on the heap. Strdupl works in a similar fashion, except the string follows the call. As
                usual, the carry flag is set if there is a memory allocation error when using strdup or strdupl.
                Examples:
                String1              byte          “Copy this string”,0
                String2              byte          32 dup (0)
                String3              byte          32 dup (0)
                StrVar1              dword         0
                StrVar2              dword         0
                                      .
                                      .
                                      .
                                     lesi       String1         ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                     ldxi       String2         ;See strcat for ldxi definition.
                                     strcpy

                                     ldxi       String3
                                     strcpyl
                                     byte       “This string, too!”,0
                                     lesi       String1
                                     strdup
                                     jc         error                                 ;If insufficient mem.
                                     mov        word ptr StrVar1, di                  ;Save away ptr to
                                     mov        word ptr StrVar1+2, es                ; string.

                                     strdupl
                                     jc         error
                                     byte       “Also, this string”,0
                                     mov        word ptr StrVar2, di
                                     mov        word ptr StrVar2+2, es

                                     printf
                                     byte       “strcpy: %s\n”
                                     byte       “strcpyl: %s\n”
                                     byte       “strdup: %^s\n”
                                     byte       “strdupl: %^s\n”,0
                                     dword      String2, String3, StrVar1, StrVar2



15.4.6       Strdel, Strdelm

                     Strdel and strdelm delete characters from a string. Strdel deletes the specified characters
                within the string, strdelm creates a new copy of the source string without the specified
                characters. On entry, es:di points at the string to manipulate, cx contains the index into the
                string where the deletion is to start, and ax contains the number of characters to delete
                from the string. On return, es:di points at the new string (which is on the heap if you call
                strdelm). For strdelm only, if the carry flag is set on return, there was a memory allocation
                error. As with all UCR StdLib string routines, the index values for the string are
                zero-based. That is, zero is the index of the first character in the source string. Example:
                String1              byte       “Hello there, how are you?”,0
                                      .
                                      .
                                      .
                                     lesi       String1         ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                     mov        cx, 5           ;Start at position five (“ there”)
                                     mov        ax, 6           ;Delete six characters.
                                     strdelm                    ;Create a new string.
                                     jc         error           ;If insufficient memory.
                                     print
                                     byte       “New string:”,0
                                     puts

Page 850
                                                                                   Strings and Character Sets

                                 putcr

                                 lesi       String1
                                 mov        ax, 11
                                 mov        cx, 13
                                 strdel
                                 printf
                                 byte       “Modified string: %s\n”,0
                                 dword      String1

            This code prints the following:
            New string: Hello, how are you?
            Modified string: Hello there



15.4.7   Strins, Strinsl, Strinsm, Strinsml

                 The strins(xx) functions insert one string within another. For all four routines es:di
            points at the source string into you want to insert another string. Cx contains the insertion
            point (0..length of source string). For strins and strinsm, dx:si points at the string you wish to
            insert. For strinsl and strinsml, the string to insert appears as a literal constant in the code
            stream. Strins and strinsl insert the second string directly into the string pointed at by es:di.
            Strinsm and strinsml make a copy of the source string and insert the second string into that
            copy. They return a pointer to the new string in es:di. If there is a memory allocation error
            then strinsm/strinsml sets the carry flag on return. For strins and strinsl, the first string must
            have sufficient storage allocated to hold the new string. Examples:
            InsertInMe           byte       “Insert >< Here”,0
                                 byte       16 dup (0)
            InsertStr            byte       “insert this”,0
            StrPtr1              dword      0
            StrPtr2              dword      0
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                 lesi       InsertInMe       ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                 ldxi       InsertStr        ;See strcat for ldxi definition.
                                 mov        cx, 8            ;Însert before “<“
                                 strinsm
                                 mov        word ptr StrPtr1, di
                                 mov        word ptr StrPtr1+2, es

                                 lesi       InsertInMe
                                 mov        cx, 8
                                 strinsml
                                 byte       “insert that”,0
                                 mov        word ptr StrPtr2, di
                                 mov        word ptr StrPtr2+2, es

                                 lesi       InsertInMe
                                 mov        cx, 8
                                 strinsl
                                 byte       “ “,0            ;Two spaces

                                 lesi       InsertInMe
                                 ldxi       InsertStr
                                 mov        cx, 9            ;In front of first space from above.
                                 strins

                                 printf
                                 byte       “First string: %^s\n”
                                 byte       “Second string: %^s\n”
                                 byte       “Third string: %s\n”,0
                                 dword      StrPtr1, StrPtr2, InsertInMe

            Note that the strins and strinsl operations above both insert strings into the same destina-
            tion string. The output from the above code is


                                                                                                    Page 851
Chapter 15

                First string: Insert >insert this< here
                Second string: Insert >insert that< here
                Third string: Insert > insert this < here




15.4.8       Strlen

                     Strlen computes the length of the string pointed at by es:di. It returns the number of
                characters up to, but not including, the zero terminating byte. It returns this length in the
                cx register. Example:
                GetLen               byte       “This string is 33 characters long”,0
                                      .
                                      .
                                      .
                                     lesi       GetLen          ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                     strlen
                                     print
                                     byte       “The string is “,0
                                     mov        ax, cx       ;Puti needs the length in AX!
                                     puti
                                     print
                                     byte       “ characters long”,cr,lf,0



15.4.9       Strlwr, Strlwrm, Strupr, Struprm

                    Strlwr and Strlwrm convert any upper case characters in a string to lower case. Strupr
                and Struprm convert any lower case characters in a string to upper case. These routines do
                not affect any other characters present in the string. For all four routines, es:di points at the
                source string to convert. Strlwr and strupr modify the characters directly in that string. Strl-
                wrm and struprm make a copy of the string to the heap and then convert the characters in
                the new string. They also return a pointer to this new string in es:di. As usual for UCR
                StdLib routines, strlwrm and struprm return the carry flag set if there is a memory allocation
                error. Examples:
                String1              byte       “This string has lower case.”,0
                String2              byte       “THIS STRING has Upper Case.”,0
                StrPtr1              dword      0
                StrPtr2              dword      0
                                      .
                                      .
                                      .
                                     lesi       String1         ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                     struprm                    ;Convert lower case to upper case.
                                     jc         error
                                     mov        word ptr StrPtr1, di
                                     mov        word ptr StrPtr1+2, es

                                     lesi       String2
                                     strlwrm                 ;Convert upper case to lower case.
                                     jc         error
                                     mov        word ptr StrPtr2, di
                                     mov        word ptr StrPtr2+2, es

                                     lesi       String1
                                     strlwr                     ;Convert to lower case, in place.

                                     lesi       String2
                                     strupr                     ;Convert to upper case, in place.

                                     printf
                                     byte       “struprm: %^s\n”
                                     byte       “strlwrm: %^s\n”
                                     byte       “strlwr: %s\n”
                                     byte       “strupr: %s\n”,0
                                     dword      StrPtr1, StrPtr2, String1, String2



Page 852
                                                                                   Strings and Character Sets

            The above code fragment prints the following:
            struprm: THIS STRING HAS LOWER CASE
            strlwrm: this string has upper case
            strlwr: this string has lower case
            strupr: THIS STRING HAS UPPER CASE



15.4.10 Strrev, Strrevm

                These two routines reverse the characters in a string. For example, if you pass strrev
            the string “ABCDEF” it will convert that string to “FEDCBA”. As you’d expect by now,
            the strrev routine reverse the string whose address you pass in es:di; strrevm first makes a
            copy of the string on the heap and reverses those characters leaving the original string
            unchanged. Of course strrevm will return the carry flag set if there was a memory alloca-
            tion error. Example:
            Palindrome           byte       “radar”,0
            NotPaldrm            byte       “x + y - z”,0
            StrPtr1              dword      0
                                  .
                                  .
                                  .
                                 lesi       Palindrome      ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                 strrevm
                                 jc         error
                                 mov        word ptr StrPtr1, di
                                 mov        word ptr StrPtr1+2, es
                                 lesi       NotPaldrm
                                 strrev
                                 printf
                                 byte       “First string: %^s\n”
                                 byte       “Second string: %s\n”,0
                                 dword      StrPtr1, NotPaldrm

            The above code produces the following output:

            First string: radar
            Second string: z - y + x



15.4.11 Strset, Strsetm

                 Strset and strsetm replicate a single character through a string. Their behavior, how-
            ever, is not quite the same. In particular, while strsetm is quite similar to the repeat function
            (see “Repeat” on page 840), strset is not. Both routines expect a single character value in
            the al register. They will replicate this character throughout some string. Strsetm also
            requires a count in the cx register. It creates a string on the heap consisting of cx characters
            and returns a pointer to this string in es:di (assuming no memory allocation error). Strset,
            on the other hand, expects you to pass it the address of an existing string in es:di. It will
            replace each character in that string with the character in al. Note that you do not specify a
            length when using the strset function, strset uses the length of the existing string. Exam-
            ple:
            String1              byte       “Hello there”,0
                                  .
                                  .
                                  .
                                 lesi       String1         ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                 mov        al, ‘*’
                                 strset
                                 mov        cx, 8
                                 mov        al, ‘#’
                                 strsetm
                                 print


                                                                                                   Page 853
Chapter 15

                                  byte          “String2: “,0
                                  puts
                                  printf
                                  byte          “\nString1: %s\n“,0
                                  dword         String1

             The above code produces the output:
             String2: ########
             String1: ***********



15.4.12 Strspan, Strspanl, Strcspan, Strcspanl

                  These four routines search through a string for a character which is either in some
             specified character set (strspan, strspanl) or not a member of some character set (strcspan,
             strcspanl). These routines appear in the UCR Standard Library only because of their
             appearance in the C standard library. You should rarely use these routines. The UCR Stan-
             dard Library includes some other routines for manipulating character sets and perform-
             ing character matching operations. Nonetheless, these routines are somewhat useful on
             occasion and are worth a mention here.
                  These routines expect you to pass them the addresses of two strings: a source string
             and a character set string. They expect the address of the source string in es:di. Strspan and
             strcspan want the address of the character set string in dx:si; the character set string follows
             the call with strspanl and strcspanl. On return, cx contains an index into the string, defined
             as follows:
                 strspan, strspanl:       Index of first character in source found in the character set.
                 strcspan, strcspanl:     Index of first character in source not found in the character set.
             If all the characters are in the set (or are not in the set) then cx contains the index into the
             string of the zero terminating byte.
             Example:
             Source               byte          “ABCDEFG 0123456”,0
             Set1                 byte          “ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ”,0
             Set2                 byte          “0123456789”,0
             Index1               word          ?
             Index2               word          ?
             Index3               word          ?
             Index4               word          ?
                                      .
                                      .
                                      .
                                  lesi          Source         ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                  ldxi          Set1           ;See strcat for ldxi definition.
                                  strspan                      ;Search for first ALPHA char.
                                  mov           Index1, cx     ;Index of first alphabetic char.

                                  lesi          Source
                                  lesi          Set2
                                  strspan                      ;Search for first numeric char.
                                  mov           Index2, cx

                                  lesi      Source
                                  strcspanl
                                  byte      “ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ”,0
                                  mov       Index3, cx

                                  lesi     Set2
                                  strcspnl
                                  byte     “0123456789”,0
                                  mov      Index4, cx

                                  printf
                                  byte          “First alpha char in Source is at offset %d\n”
                                  byte          “First numeric char is at offset %d\n”


Page 854
                                                                                    Strings and Character Sets

                                  byte       “First non-alpha in Source is at offset %d\n”
                                  byte       “First non-numeric in Set2 is at offset %d\n”,0
                                  dword      Index1, Index2, Index3, Index4

             This code outputs the following:
             First   alpha char in Source is at offset 0
             First   numeric char is at offset 8
             First   non-alpha in Source is at offset 7
             First   non-numeric in Set2 is at offset 10




15.4.13 Strstr, Strstrl

                 Strstr searches for the first occurrence of one string within another. es:di contains the
             address of the string in which you want to search for a second string. dx:si contains the
             address of the second string for the strstr routine; for strstrl the search second string imme-
             diately follows the call in the code stream.
                 On return from strstr or strstrl, the carry flag will be set if the second string is not
             present in the source string. If the carry flag is clear, then the second string is present in the
             source string and cx will contain the (zero-based) index where the second string was
             found. Example:
             SourceStr            byte       “Search for ‘this’ in this string”,0
             SearchStr            byte       “this”,0
                                    .
                                    .
                                    .
                                  lesi       SourceStr       ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                  ldxi       SearchStr       ;See strcat for ldxi definition.
                                  strstr
                                  jc         NotPresent
                                  print
                                  byte       “Found string at offset “,0
                                  mov        ax, cx       ;Need offset in AX for puti
                                  puti
                                  putcr

                                  lesi       SourceStr
                                  strstrl
                                  byte       “for”,0
                                  jc         NotPresent
                                  print
                                  byte       “Found ‘for’ at offset “,0
                                  mov        ax, cx
                                  puti
                                  putcr
             NotPresent:

             The above code prints the following:
             Found string at offset 12
             Found ‘for’ at offset 7



15.4.14 Strtrim, Strtrimm

                 These two routines are quite similar to strbdel and strbdelm. Rather than removing
             leading spaces, however, they trim off any trailing spaces from a string. Strtrim trims off
             any trailing spaces directly on the specified string in memory. Strtrimm first copies the
             source string and then trims and space off the copy. Both routines expect you to pass the
             address of the source string in es:di. Strtrimm returns a pointer to the new string (if it could
             allocate it) in es:di. It also returns the carry set or clear to denote error/no error. Example:




                                                                                                     Page 855
Chapter 15

              String1             byte       “Spaces at the end      “,0
              String2             byte       “    Spaces on both sides           “,0
              StrPtr1             dword      0
              StrPtr2             dword      0
                                    .
                                    .
                                    .

              ;   TrimSpcs trims the spaces off both ends of a string.
              ;   Note that it is a little more efficient to perform the
              ;   strbdel first, then the strtrim. This routine creates
              ;   the new string on the heap and returns a pointer to this
              ;   string in ES:DI.

              TrimSpcs            proc
                                  strbdelm
                                  jc       BadAlloc          ;Just return if error.
                                  strtrim
                                  clc
              BadAlloc:           ret
              TrimSpcs            endp
                                              .
                                              .
                                              .
                                  lesi       String1         ;See strcat for lesi definition.
                                  strtrimm
                                  jc         error
                                  mov        word ptr StrPtr1, di
                                  mov        word ptr StrPtr1+2, es

                                  lesi       String2
                                  call       TrimSpcs
                                  jc         error
                                  mov        word ptr StrPtr2, di
                                  mov        word ptr StrPtr2+2, es

                                  printf
                                  byte       “First string: ‘%s’\n”
                                  byte       “Second string: ‘%s’\n”,0
                                  dword      StrPtr1, StrPtr2

              This code fragment outputs the following:
              First string: ‘Spaces at the end’
              Second string: ‘Spaces on both sides’



15.4.15 Other String Routines in the UCR Standard Library

                   In addition to the “strxxx” routines listed in this section, there are many additional
              string routines available in the UCR Standard Library. Routines to convert from numeric
              types (integer, hex, real, etc.) to a string or vice versa, pattern matching and character set
              routines, and many other conversion and string utilities. The routines described in this
              chapter are those whose definitions appear in the “strings.a” header file and are specifi-
              cally targeted towards generic string manipulation. For more details on the other string
              routines, consult the UCR Standard Library reference section in the appendices.



15.5    The Character Set Routines in the UCR Standard Library
                   The UCR Standard Library provides an extensive collection of character set routines.
              These routines let you create sets, clear sets (set them to the empty set), add and remove
              one or more items, test for set membership, copy sets, compute the union, intersection, or
              difference, and extract items from a set. Although intended to manipulate sets of charac-
              ters, you can use the StdLib character set routines to manipulate any set with 256 or fewer
              possible items.



Page 856
                                                                    Strings and Character Sets

    The first unusual thing to note about the StdLib’s sets is their storage format. A 256-bit
array would normally consumes 32 consecutive bytes. For performance reasons, the UCR
Standard Library’s set format packs eight separate sets into 272 bytes (256 bytes for the
eight sets plus 16 bytes overhead). To declare set variables in your data segment you
should use the set macro. This macro takes the form:
                    set        SetName1, SetName2, ..., SetName8

SetName1..SetName8 represent the names of up to eight set variables. You may have fewer
than eight names in the operand field, but doing so will waste some bits in the set array.
    The CreateSets routine provides another mechanism for creating set variables. Unlike
the set macro, which you would use to create set variables in your data segment, the
CreateSets routine allocates storage for up to eight sets dynamically at run time. It returns
a pointer to the first set variable in es:di. The remaining seven sets follow at locations
es:di+1, es:di+2, ..., es:di+7. A typical program that allocates set variables dynamically
might use the following code:
Set0                dword      ?
Set1                dword      ?
Set2                dword      ?
Set3                dword      ?
Set4                dword      ?
Set5                dword      ?
Set6                dword      ?
Set7                dword      ?
                      .
                      .
                      .
                    CreateSets
                    mov      word     ptr   Set0+2,   es
                    mov      word     ptr   Set1+2,   es
                    mov      word     ptr   Set2+2,   es
                    mov      word     ptr   Set3+2,   es
                    mov      word     ptr   Set4+2,   es
                    mov      word     ptr   Set5+2,   es
                    mov      word     ptr   Set6+2,   es
                    mov      word     ptr   Set7+2,   es
                    mov        word   ptr Set0, di
                    inc        di
                    mov        word   ptr Set1, di
                    inc        di
                    mov        word   ptr Set2, di
                    inc        di
                    mov        word   ptr Set3, di
                    inc        di
                    mov        word   ptr Set4, di
                    inc        di
                    mov        word   ptr Set5, di
                    inc        di
                    mov        word   ptr Set6, di
                    inc        di
                    mov        word   ptr Set7, di
                    inc        di

This code segment creates eight different sets on the heap, all empty, and stores pointers to
them in the appropriate pointer variables.
    The SHELL.ASM file provides a commented-out line of code in the data segment that
includes the file STDSETS.A. This include file provides the bit definitions for eight com-
monly used character sets. They are alpha (upper and lower case alphabetics), lower (lower
case alphabetics), upper (upper case alphabetics), digits (“0”..”9”), xdigits (“0”..”9”,
“A”..”F”, and “a”..”f”), alphanum (upper and lower case alphabetics plus the digits),
whitespace (space, tab, carriage return, and line feed), and delimiters (whitespace plus com-
mas, semicolons, less than, greater than, and vertical bar). If you would like to use these
standard character sets in your program, you need to remove the semicolon from the
beginning of the include statement in the SHELL.ASM file.


                                                                                     Page 857
Chapter 15

                 The UCR Standard Library provides 16 character set routines: CreateSets, EmptySet,
             RangeSet, AddStr, AddStrl, RmvStr, RmvStrl, AddChar, RmvChar, Member, CopySet, SetUnion,
             SetIntersect, SetDifference, NextItem, and RmvItem. All of these routines except CreateSets
             require a pointer to a character set variable in the es:di registers. Specific routines may
             require other parameters as well.
                 The EmptySet routine clears all the bits in a set producing the empty set. This routine
             requires the address of the set variable in the es:di. The following example clears the set
             pointed at by Set1:
                                  les      di, Set1
                                  EmptySet

                  RangeSet unions in a range of values into the set variable pointed at by es:di. The al
             register contains the lower bound of the range of items, ah contains the upper bound.
             Note that al must be less than or equal to ah. The following example constructs the set of
             all control characters (ASCII codes one through 31, the null character [ASCII code zero] is
             not allowed in sets):
                                  les      di, CtrlCharSet                ;Ptr to ctrl char set.
                                  mov      al, 1
                                  mov      ah, 31
                                  RangeSet

                 AddStr and AddStrl add all the characters in a zero terminated string to a character set.
             For AddStr, the dx:si register pair points at the zero terminated string. For AddStrl, the zero
             terminated string follows the call to AddStrl in the code stream. These routines union each
             character of the specified string into the set. The following examples add the digits and
             some special characters into the FPDigits set:
             Digits               byte       “0123456789”,0
                                  set        FPDigitsSet
             FPDigits             dword      FPDigitsSet
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                  ldxi       Digits       ;Loads DX:SI with adrs of Digits.
                                  les        di, FPDigits
                                  AddStr
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                  les        di, FPDigits
                                  AddStrL
                                  byte       “Ee.+-”,0

                  RmvStr and RmvStrl remove characters from a set. You supply the characters in a zero
             terminated string. For RmvStr, dx:si points at the string of characters to remove from the
             string. For RmvStrl, the zero terminated string follows the call. The following example uses
             RmvStrl to remove the special symbols from FPDigits above:
                                  les        di, FPDigits
                                  RmvStrl
                                  byte       “Ee.+-”,0

                 The AddChar and RmvChar routines let you add or remove individual characters. As
             usual, es:di points at the set; the al register contains the character you wish to add to the set
             or remove from the set. The following example adds a space to the set FPDigits and
             removes the “,” character (if present):
                                  les        di, FPDigits
                                  mov        al, ‘ ‘
                                  AddChar
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                  les        di, FPDigits
                                  mov        al, ‘,’
                                  RmvChar




Page 858
                                                                                      Strings and Character Sets

                    The Member function checks to see if a character is in a set. On entry, es:di must point
               at the set and al must contain the character to check. On exit, the zero flag is set if the char-
               acter is a member of the set, the zero flag will be clear if the character is not in the set. The
               following example reads characters from the keyboard until the user presses a key that is
               not a whitespace character:
               SkipWS:              get                        ;Read char from user into AL.
                                    lesi       WhiteSpace      ;Address of WS set into es:di.
                                    member
                                    je         SkipWS

                   The CopySet, SetUnion, SetIntersect, and SetDifference routines all operate on two sets of
               characters. The es:di register points at the destination character set, the dx:si register pair
               points at a source character set. CopySet copies the bits from the source set to the destina-
               tion set, replacing the original bits in the destination set. SetUnion computes the union of
               the two sets and stores the result into the destination set. SetIntersect computes the set
               intersection and stores the result into the destination set. Finally, the SetDifference routine
               computes DestSet := DestSet - SrcSet.
                   The NextItem and RmvItem routines let you extract elements from a set. NextItem
               returns in al the ASCII code of the first character it finds in a set. RmvItem does the same
               thing except it also removes the character from the set. These routines return zero in al if
               the set is empty (StdLib sets cannot contain the NULL character). You can use the RmvItem
               routine to build a rudimentary iterator for a character set.
                   The UCR Standard Library’s character set routines are very powerful. With them, you
               can easily manipulate character string data, especially when searching for different pat-
               terns within a string. We will consider this routines again when we study pattern match-
               ing later in this text (see “Pattern Matching” on page 883).



15.6     Using the String Instructions on Other Data Types
                   The string instructions work with other data types besides character strings. You can
               use the string instructions to copy whole arrays from one variable to another, to initialize
               large data structures to a single value, or to compare entire data structures for equality or
               inequality. Anytime you’re dealing with data structures containing several bytes, you may
               be able to use the string instructions.


15.6.1     Multi-precision Integer Strings

                   The cmps instruction is useful for comparing (very) large integer values. Unlike char-
               acter strings, we cannot compare integers with cmps from the L.O. byte through the H.O.
               byte. Instead, we must compare them from the H.O. byte down to the L.O. byte. The fol-
               lowing code compares two 12-byte integers:
                                    lea        di, integer1+10
                                    lea        si, integer2+10
                                    mov        cx, 6
                                    std
                         repe       cmpsw

               After the execution of the cmpsw instruction, the flags will contain the result of the com-
               parison.
                   You can easily assign one long integer string to another using the movs instruction.
               Nothing tricky here, just load up the si, di, and cx registers and have at it. You must do
               other operations, including arithmetic and logical operations, using the extended preci-
               sion methods described in the chapter on arithmetic operations.




                                                                                                      Page 859
Chapter 15


15.6.2       Dealing with Whole Arrays and Records

                    The only operations that apply, in general, to all array and record structures are
                assignment and comparison (for equality/inequality only). You can use the movs and
                cmps instructions for these operations.
                    Operations such as scalar addition, transposition, etc., may be easily synthesized
                using the lods and stos instructions. The following code shows how you can easily add the
                value 20 to each element of the integer array A:
                                     lea       si, A
                                     mov       di, si
                                     mov       cx, SizeOfA
                                     cld
                AddLoop:             lodsw
                                     add       ax, 20
                                     stosw
                                     loop      AddLoop

                     You can implement other operations in a similar fashion.



15.7     Sample Programs
                    In this section there are three sample programs. The first searches through a file for a
                particular string and displays the line numbers of any lines containing that string. This
                program demonstrates the use of the strstr function (among other things). The second pro-
                gram is a demo program that uses several of the string functions available in the UCR
                Standard Library’s string package. The third program demonstrates how to use the 80x86
                cmps instruction to compare the data in two files. These programs (find.asm, strdemo.asm,
                and fcmp.asm) are available on the companion CD-ROM.


15.7.1       Find.asm

                ;   Find.asm
                ;
                ;   This program opens a file specified on the command line and searches for
                ;   a string (also specified on the command line).
                ;
                ;   Program Usage:
                ;
                ;        find "string" filename


                                     .xlist
                                     include    stdlib.a
                                     includelib stdlib.lib
                                     .list

                wp                   textequ   <word ptr>

                dseg                 segment   para public 'data'

                StrPtr               dword     ?
                FileName             dword     ?
                LineCnt              dword     ?

                FVar                 filevar   {}

                InputLine            byte      1024 dup (?)
                dseg                 ends




Page 860
                                                          Strings and Character Sets

cseg             segment   para public 'code'
                 assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg


; Readln-        This procedure reads a line of text from the input
;                file and buffers it up in the "InputLine" array.

ReadLn           proc
                 push      es
                 push      ax
                 push      di
                 push      bx

                 lesi      FVar        ;Read from our file.
                 mov       bx, 0       ;Index into InputLine.
ReadLp:          fgetc                 ;Get next char from file.
                 jc        EndRead     ;Quit on EOF

                 cmp       al, cr      ;Ignore carriage returns.
                 je        ReadLp
                 cmp       al, lf      ;End of line on line feed.
                 je        EndRead

                 mov       InputLine[bx], al
                 inc       bx
                 jmp       ReadLp

; If we hit the end of a line or the end of the file,
; zero-terminate the string.

EndRead:         mov       InputLine[bx], 0
                 pop       bx
                 pop       di
                 pop       ax
                 pop       es
                 ret
ReadLn           endp


; The following main program extracts the search string and the
; filename from the command line, opens the file, and then searches
; for the string in that file.

Main             proc
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax
                 mov       es, ax
                 meminit

                 argc
                 cmp       cx, 2
                 je        GoodArgs
                 print
                 byte      "Usage: find 'string' filename",cr,lf,0
                 jmp       Quit

GoodArgs:        mov       ax, 1        ;Get the string to search for
                 argv                   ; off the command line.
                 mov       wp StrPtr, di
                 mov       wp StrPtr+2, es

                 mov       ax, 2        ;Get the filename from the
                 argv                   ; command line.
                 mov       wp Filename, di
                 mov       wp Filename+2, es

; Open the input file for reading

                 mov       ax, 0        ;Open for read.
                 mov       si, wp FileName


                                                                          Page 861
Chapter 15

                                  mov       dx, wp FileName+2
                                  lesi      Fvar
                                  fopen
                                  jc        BadOpen

                ; Okay, start searching for the string in the file.

                                  mov       wp LineCnt, 0
                                  mov       wp LineCnt+2, 0
                SearchLp:         call      ReadLn
                                  jc        AtEOF


                ;   Bump the line number up by one. Note that this is 8086 code
                ;   so we have to use extended precision arithmetic to do a 32-bit
                ;   add. LineCnt is a 32-bit variable because some files have more
                ;   that 65,536 lines.

                                  add       wp LineCnt, 1
                                  adc       wp LineCnt+2, 0

                ; Search for the user-specified string on the current line.

                                  lesi      InputLine
                                  mov       dx, wp StrPtr+2
                                  mov       si, wp StrPtr
                                  strstr
                                  jc        SearchLp;Jump if not found.

                ; Print an appropriate message if we found the string.

                                  printf
                                  byte      "Found '%^s' at line %ld\n",0
                                  dword     StrPtr, LineCnt
                                  jmp       SearchLp

                ; Close the file when we're done.

                AtEOF:            lesi      FVar
                                  fclose
                                  jmp       Quit

                BadOpen:          printf
                                  byte      "Error attempting to open %^s\n",cr,lf,0
                                  dword     FileName


                Quit:             ExitPgm                 ;DOS macro to quit program.
                Main              endp

                cseg              ends

                sseg              segment   para stack 'stack'
                stk               db        1024 dup ("stack   ")
                sseg              ends

                zzzzzzseg         segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
                LastBytes         db        16 dup (?)
                zzzzzzseg         ends
                                  end       Main



15.7.2       StrDemo.asm

                    This short demo program just shows off how to use several of the string routines
                found in the UCR Standard Library strings package.
                ; StrDemo.asm-    Demonstration of some of the various UCR Standard Library
                ;                 string routines.


Page 862
                                                              Strings and Character Sets


                 include    stdlib.a
                 includelib stdlib.lib

dseg             segment     para public 'data'

MemAvail         word        ?
String           byte        256 dup (0)

dseg             ends



cseg             segment     para public 'code'
                 assume      cs:cseg, ds:dseg


Main             proc
                 mov         ax, seg dseg ;Set up the segment registers
                 mov         ds, ax
                 mov         es, ax

                 MemInit
                 mov         MemAvail, cx
                 printf
                 byte        "There are %x paragraphs of memory available."
                 byte        cr,lf,lf,0
                 dword       MemAvail

; Demonstration of StrTrim:

                 print
                 byte        "Testing strtrim on 'Hello there       '",cr,lf,0
                 strdupl
HelloThere1      byte        "Hello there      ",0
                 strtrim
                 mov         al, "'"
                 putc
                 puts
                 putc
                 putcr
                 free

;Demonstration of StrTrimm:

                 print
                 byte     "Testing strtrimm on 'Hello there         '",cr,lf,0
                 lesi     HelloThere1
                 strtrimm
                 mov      al, "'"
                 putc
                 puts
                 putc
                 putcr
                 free

; Demonstration of StrBdel

                 print
                 byte        "Testing strbdel on '    Hello there    '",cr,lf,0
                 strdupl
HelloThere3      byte        "   Hello there    ",0
                 strbdel
                 mov         al, "'"
                 putc
                 puts
                 putc
                 putcr
                 free



                                                                              Page 863
Chapter 15

             ; Demonstration of StrBdelm

                                print
                                byte     "Testing strbdelm on '      Hello there   '",cr,lf,0
                                lesi     HelloThere3
                                strbdelm
                                mov      al, "'"
                                putc
                                puts
                                putc
                                putcr
                                free


             ; Demonstrate StrCpyl:

                                ldxi      string
                                strcpyl
                                byte      "Copy this string to the 'String' variable",0

                                printf
                                byte      "STRING = '%s'",cr,lf,0
                                dword     String

             ; Demonstrate StrCatl:

                                lesi      String
                                strcatl
                                byte      ". Put at end of 'String'",0

                                printf
                                byte      "STRING = ",'"%s"',cr,lf,0
                                dword     String

             ; Demonstrate StrChr:

                                lesi      String
                                mov       al, "'"
                                strchr

                                print
                                byte      "StrChr: First occurrence of ", '"', "'"
                                byte      '" found at position ',0
                                mov       ax, cx
                                puti
                                putcr

             ; Demonstrate StrStrl:

                                lesi      String
                                strstrl
                                byte      "String",0

                                print
                                byte      'StrStr: First occurrence of "String" found at ‘
                                byte      ‘position ',0

                                mov       ax, cx
                                puti
                                putcr

             ; Demo of StrSet

                                lesi      String
                                mov       al, '*'
                                strset

                                printf
                                byte      "Strset:   '%s'",cr,lf,0
                                dword     String


Page 864
                                                                            Strings and Character Sets


           ; Demo of strlen

                              lesi       String
                              strlen

                              print
                              byte       "String length = ",0
                              puti
                              putcr

           Quit:              mov       ah, 4ch
                              int       21h
           Main               endp

           cseg               ends

           sseg               segment    para stack 'stack'
           stk                db         256 dup ("stack   ")
           sseg               ends

           zzzzzzseg          segment    para public 'zzzzzz'
           LastBytes          db         16 dup (?)
           zzzzzzseg          ends
                              end        Main



15.7.3   Fcmp.asm

               This is a file comparison program. It demonstrates the use of the 80x86 cmps instruc-
           tion (as well as blocked I/O under DOS).
           ; FCMP.ASM-        A file comparison program that demonstrates the use
           ;                  of the 80x86 string instructions.

                              .xlist
                              include    stdlib.a
                              includelib stdlib.lib
                              .list

           dseg               segment        para public 'data'

           Name1              dword      ?             ;Ptr to filename #1
           Name2              dword      ?             ;Ptr to filename #2
           Handle1            word       ?             ;File handle for file #1
           Handle2            word       ?             ;File handle for file #2
           LineCnt            word       0             ;# of lines in the file.

           Buffer1            byte       256 dup (0)   ;Block of data from file 1
           Buffer2            byte       256 dup (0)   ;Block of data from file 2

           dseg               ends

           wp                 equ        <word ptr>

           cseg               segment    para public 'code'
                              assume     cs:cseg, ds:dseg

           ; Error- Prints a DOS error message depending upon the error type.

           Error              proc       near
                              cmp        ax, 2
                              jne        NotFNF
                              print
                              byte       "File not found",0
                              jmp        ErrorDone

           NotFNF:            cmp        ax, 4
                              jne        NotTMF


                                                                                            Page 865
Chapter 15

                              print
                              byte        "Too many open files",0
                              jmp         ErrorDone

             NotTMF:          cmp         ax, 5
                              jne         NotAD
                              print
                              byte        "Access denied",0
                              jmp         ErrorDone

             NotAD:           cmp         ax, 12
                              jne         NotIA
                              print
                              byte        "Invalid access",0
                              jmp         ErrorDone

             NotIA:
             ErrorDone:       putcr
                              ret
             Error            endp

             ; Okay, here's the main program. It opens two files, compares them, and
             ; complains if they're different.

             Main             proc
                              mov         ax, seg dseg              ;Set up the segment registers
                              mov         ds, ax
                              mov         es, ax
                              meminit

             ; File comparison routine.    First, open the two source files.

                              argc
                              cmp         cx, 2                     ;Do we have two filenames?
                              je          GotTwoNames
                              print
                              byte        "Usage: fcmp file1 file2",cr,lf,0
                              jmp         Quit

             GotTwoNames:     mov         ax, 1                     ;Get first file name
                              argv
                              mov         wp Name1, di
                              mov         wp Name1+2, es

             ; Open the files by calling DOS.

                              mov         ax, 3d00h                 ;Open for reading
                              lds         dx, Name1
                              int         21h
                              jnc         GoodOpen1
                              printf
                              byte        "Error opening %^s:",0
                              dword       Name1
                              call        Error
                              jmp         Quit

             GoodOpen1:       mov         dx, dseg
                              mov         ds, dx
                              mov         Handle1, ax

                              mov         ax, 2                     ;Get second file name
                              argv
                              mov         wp Name2, di
                              mov         wp Name2+2, es

                              mov         ax, 3d00h                 ;Open for reading
                              lds         dx, Name2
                              int         21h
                              jnc         GoodOpen2
                              printf


Page 866
                                                              Strings and Character Sets

                 byte     "Error opening %^s:",0
                 dword    Name2
                 call     Error
                 jmp      Quit

GoodOpen2:       mov      dx, dseg
                 mov      ds, dx
                 mov      Handle2, ax

; Read the data from the files using blocked I/O
; and compare it.

                 mov      LineCnt, 1
CmpLoop:         mov      bx, Handle1               ;Read 256 bytes from
                 mov      cx, 256                   ; the first file into
                 lea      dx, Buffer1               ; Buffer1.
                 mov      ah, 3fh
                 int      21h
                 jc       FileError
                 cmp      ax, 256                   ;Leave if at EOF.
                 jne      EndOfFile

                 mov      bx, Handle2               ;Read 256 bytes from
                 mov      cx, 256                   ; the second file into
                 lea      dx, Buffer2               ; Buffer2
                 mov      ah, 3fh
                 int      21h
                 jc       FileError
                 cmp      ax, 256                   ;If we didn't read 256 bytes,
                 jne      BadLen                    ; the files are different.

; Okay, we've just read 256 bytes from each file, compare the buffers
; to see if the data is the same in both files.

                 mov      ax,   dseg
                 mov      ds,   ax
                 mov      es,   ax
                 mov      cx,   256
                 lea      di,   Buffer1
                 lea      si,   Buffer2
                 cld
          repe   cmpsb
                 jne      BadCmp
                 jmp      CmpLoop


FileError:       print
                 byte     "Error reading files: ",0
                 call     Error
                 jmp      Quit


BadLen:          print
                 byte     "File lengths were different",cr,lf,0

BadCmp:          print
                 byte     7,"Files were not equal",cr,lf,0

                 mov      ax, 4c01h       ;Exit with error.
                 int      21h


; If we reach the end of the first file, compare any remaining bytes
; in that first file against the remaining bytes in the second file.

EndOfFile:       push     ax              ;Save final length.
                 mov      bx,   Handle2
                 mov      cx,   256
                 lea      dx,   Buffer2
                 mov      ah,   3fh


                                                                              Page 867
Chapter 15

                                    int       21h
                                    jc        BadCmp

                                    pop       bx              ;Retrieve file1's length.
                                    cmp       ax, bx          ;See if file2 matches it.
                                    jne       BadLen

                                    mov       cx,   ax        ;Compare the remaining
                                    mov       ax,   dseg      ; bytes down here.
                                    mov       ds,   ax
                                    mov       es,   ax
                                    lea       di,   Buffer2
                                    lea       si,   Buffer1
                        repe        cmpsb
                                    jne       BadCmp

                Quit:               mov       ax, 4c00h       ;Set Exit code to okay.
                                    int       21h
                Main                endp
                cseg                ends

                ; Allocate a reasonable amount of space for the stack (2k).

                sseg                segment   para stack 'stack'
                stk                 byte      256 dup ("stack   ")
                sseg                ends

                zzzzzzseg           segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
                LastBytes           byte      16 dup (?)
                zzzzzzseg           ends
                                    end       Main



15.8     Laboratory Exercises
                    These exercises use the Ex15_1.asm, Ex15_2.asm, Ex15_3.asm, and Ex15_4.asm files
                found on the companion CD-ROM. In this set of laboratory exercises you will be measur-
                ing the performance of the 80x86 movs instructions and the (hopefully) minor perfor-
                mance differences between length prefixed string operations and zero terminated string
                operations.


15.8.1       MOVS Performance Exercise #1

                     The movsb, movsw, and movsd instructions operate at different speeds, even when
                moving around the same number of bytes. In general, the movsw instruction is twice as
                fast as movsb when moving the same number of bytes. Likewise, movsd is about twice as
                fast as movsw (and about four times as fast as movsb) when moving the same number of
                bytes. Ex15_1.asm is a short program that demonstrates this fact. This program consists of
                three sections that copy 2048 bytes from one buffer to another 100,000 times. The three sec-
                tions repeat this operation using the movsb, movsw, and movsd instructions. Run this pro-
                gram and time each phase. For your lab report: present the timings on your machine. Be
                sure to list processor type and clock frequency in your lab report. Discuss why the timings
                are different between the three phases of this program. Explain the difficulty with using
                the movsd (versus movsw or movsb) instruction in any program on an 80386 or later proces-
                sor. Why is it not a general replacement for movsb, for example? How can you get around
                this problem?
                ; EX15_1.asm
                ;
                ; This program demonstrates the proper use of the 80x86 string instructions.

                                    .386
                                    option       segment:use16


Page 868
                                                          Strings and Character Sets


                 include    stdlib.a
                 includelib stdlib.lib


dseg             segment   para public 'data'

Buffer1          byte      2048 dup (0)
Buffer2          byte      2048 dup (0)

dseg             ends

cseg             segment   para public 'code'
                 assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

Main             proc
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax
                 mov       es, ax
                 meminit

; Demo of the movsb, movsw, and movsd instructions

                 print
                 byte      "The following code moves a block of 2,048 bytes "
                 byte      "around 100,000 times.",cr,lf
                 byte      "The first phase does this using the movsb "
                 byte      "instruction; the second",cr,lf
                 byte      "phase does this using the movsw instruction; "
                 byte      "the third phase does",cr,lf
                 byte      "this using the movsd instruction.",cr,lf,lf,lf
                 byte      "Press any key to begin phase one:",0

                 getc
                 putcr

                 mov       edx, 100000

movsbLp:         lea       si, Buffer1
                 lea       di, Buffer2
                 cld
                 mov       cx, 2048
          rep    movsb
                 dec       edx
                 jnz       movsbLp

                 print
                 byte      cr,lf
                 byte      "Phase one complete",cr,lf,lf
                 byte      "Press any key to begin phase two:",0

                 getc
                 putcr

                 mov       edx, 100000

movswLp:         lea       si, Buffer1
                 lea       di, Buffer2
                 cld
                 mov       cx, 1024
          rep    movsw
                 dec       edx
                 jnz       movswLp

                 print
                 byte      cr,lf
                 byte      "Phase two complete",cr,lf,lf
                 byte      "Press any key to begin phase three:",0

                 getc


                                                                          Page 869
Chapter 15

                                   putcr

                                   mov        edx, 100000

                movsdLp:           lea        si, Buffer1
                                   lea        di, Buffer2
                                   cld
                                   mov        cx, 512
                          rep      movsd
                                   dec        edx
                                   jnz        movsdLp


                Quit:              ExitPgm                   ;DOS macro to quit program.
                Main               endp

                cseg               ends

                sseg               segment    para stack 'stack'
                stk                db         1024 dup ("stack   ")
                sseg               ends

                zzzzzzseg          segment    para public 'zzzzzz'
                LastBytes          db         16 dup (?)
                zzzzzzseg          ends
                                   end        Main



15.8.2       MOVS Performance Exercise #2

                     In this exercise you will once again time the computer moving around blocks of 2,048
                bytes. Like Ex15_1.asm in the previous exercise, Ex15_2.asm contains three phases; the
                first phase moves data using the movsb instruction; the second phase moves the data
                around using the lodsb and stosb instructions; the third phase uses a loop with simple mov
                instructions. Run this program and time the three phases. For your lab report: include the
                timings and a description of your machine (CPU, clock speed, etc.). Discuss the timings
                and explain the results (consult Appendix D as necessary).
                ;   EX15_2.asm
                ;
                ;   This program compares the performance of the MOVS instruction against
                ;   a manual block move operation. It also compares MOVS against a LODS/STOS
                ;   loop.

                                   .386
                                   option       segment:use16

                                   include    stdlib.a
                                   includelib stdlib.lib


                dseg               segment    para public 'data'

                Buffer1            byte       2048 dup (0)
                Buffer2            byte       2048 dup (0)

                dseg               ends


                cseg               segment    para public 'code'
                                   assume     cs:cseg, ds:dseg

                Main               proc
                                   mov        ax, dseg
                                   mov        ds, ax
                                   mov        es, ax
                                   meminit



Page 870
                                                            Strings and Character Sets


; MOVSB version done here:

                 print
                 byte        "The following code moves a block of 2,048 bytes "
                 byte        "around 100,000 times.",cr,lf
                 byte        "The first phase does this using the movsb "
                 byte        "instruction; the second",cr,lf
                 byte        "phase does this using the lods/stos instructions; "
                 byte        "the third phase does",cr,lf
                 byte        "this using a loop with MOV “
                 byte        “instructions.",cr,lf,lf,lf
                 byte        "Press any key to begin phase one:",0

                 getc
                 putcr

                 mov         edx, 100000

movsbLp:         lea         si, Buffer1
                 lea         di, Buffer2
                 cld
                 mov         cx, 2048
          rep    movsb
                 dec         edx
                 jnz         movsbLp

                 print
                 byte        cr,lf
                 byte        "Phase one complete",cr,lf,lf
                 byte        "Press any key to begin phase two:",0

                 getc
                 putcr

                 mov         edx, 100000

LodsStosLp:      lea         si, Buffer1
                 lea         di, Buffer2
                 cld
                 mov         cx, 2048
lodsstoslp2:     lodsb
                 stosb
                 loop        LodsStosLp2
                 dec         edx
                 jnz         LodsStosLp

                 print
                 byte        cr,lf
                 byte        "Phase two complete",cr,lf,lf
                 byte        "Press any key to begin phase three:",0

                 getc
                 putcr

                 mov         edx, 100000

MovLp:           lea         si, Buffer1
                 lea         di, Buffer2
                 cld
                 mov         cx, 2048
MovLp2:          mov         al, ds:[si]
                 mov         es:[di], al
                 inc         si
                 inc         di
                 loop        MovLp2
                 dec         edx
                 jnz         MovLp




                                                                            Page 871
Chapter 15

                Quit:              ExitPgm                  ;DOS macro to quit program.
                Main               endp

                cseg               ends

                sseg               segment   para stack 'stack'
                stk                db        1024 dup ("stack   ")
                sseg               ends

                zzzzzzseg          segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
                LastBytes          db        16 dup (?)
                zzzzzzseg          ends
                                   end       Main



15.8.3       Memory Performance Exercise

                    In the previous two exercises, the programs accessed a maximum of 4K of data. Since
                most modern on-chip CPU caches are at least this big, most of the activity took place
                directly on the CPU (which is very fast). The following exercise is a slight modification
                that moves the array data in such a way as to destroy cache performance. Run this pro-
                gram and time the results. For your lab report: based on what you learned about the
                80x86’s cache mechanism in Chapter Three, explain the performance differences.
                ;   EX15_3.asm
                ;
                ;   This program compares the performance of the MOVS instruction against
                ;   a manual block move operation. It also compares MOVS against a LODS/STOS
                ;   loop. This version does so in such a way as to wipe out the on-chip CPU
                ;   cache.

                                   .386
                                   option       segment:use16

                                   include    stdlib.a
                                   includelib stdlib.lib

                dseg               segment   para public 'data'

                Buffer1            byte      16384 dup (0)
                Buffer2            byte      16384 dup (0)

                dseg               ends

                cseg               segment   para public 'code'
                                   assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

                Main               proc
                                   mov       ax, dseg
                                   mov       ds, ax
                                   mov       es, ax
                                   meminit


                ; MOVSB version done here:

                                   print
                                   byte      "The following code moves a block of 16,384 bytes "
                                   byte      "around 12,500 times.",cr,lf
                                   byte      "The first phase does this using the movsb "
                                   byte      "instruction; the second",cr,lf
                                   byte      "phase does this using the lods/stos instructions; "
                                   byte      "the third phase does",cr,lf
                                   byte      "this using a loop with MOV instructions."
                                   byte      cr,lf,lf,lf
                                   byte      "Press any key to begin phase one:",0

                                   getc


Page 872
                                                          Strings and Character Sets

                putcr

                mov       edx, 12500

movsbLp:        lea       si, Buffer1
                lea       di, Buffer2
                cld
                mov       cx, 16384
          rep   movsb
                dec       edx
                jnz       movsbLp

                print
                byte      cr,lf
                byte      "Phase one complete",cr,lf,lf
                byte      "Press any key to begin phase two:",0

                getc
                putcr

                mov       edx, 12500

LodsStosLp:     lea       si, Buffer1
                lea       di, Buffer2
                cld
                mov       cx, 16384
lodsstoslp2:    lodsb
                stosb
                loop      LodsStosLp2
                dec       edx
                jnz       LodsStosLp

                print
                byte      cr,lf
                byte      "Phase two complete",cr,lf,lf
                byte      "Press any key to begin phase three:",0

                getc
                putcr

                mov       edx, 12500

MovLp:          lea       si, Buffer1
                lea       di, Buffer2
                cld
                mov       cx, 16384
MovLp2:         mov       al, ds:[si]
                mov       es:[di], al
                inc       si
                inc       di
                loop      MovLp2
                dec       edx
                jnz       MovLp

Quit:           ExitPgm                 ;DOS macro to quit program.
Main            endp
cseg            ends

sseg            segment   para stack 'stack'
stk             db        1024 dup ("stack   ")
sseg            ends

zzzzzzseg       segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
LastBytes       db        16 dup (?)
zzzzzzseg       ends
                end       Main




                                                                          Page 873
Chapter 15


15.8.4       The Performance of Length-Prefixed vs. Zero-Terminated Strings

                    The following program (Ex15_4.asm on the companion CD-ROM) executes two mil-
                lion string operations. During the first phase of execution, this code executes a sequence of
                length-prefixed string operations 1,000,000 times. During the second phase it does a com-
                parable set of operation on zero terminated strings. Measure the execution time of each
                phase. For your lab report: report the differences in execution times and comment on the
                relative efficiency of length prefixed vs. zero terminated strings. Note that the relative per-
                formances of these sequences will vary depending upon the processor you use. Based on
                what you learned in Chapter Three and the cycle timings in Appendix D, explain some
                possible reasons for relative performance differences between these sequences among dif-
                ferent processors.
                ;   EX15_4.asm
                ;
                ;   This program compares the performance of length prefixed strings versus
                ;   zero terminated strings using some simple examples.
                ;
                ;   Note: these routines all assume that the strings are in the data segment
                ;         and both ds and es already point into the data segment.

                                    .386
                                    option          segment:use16

                                    include    stdlib.a
                                    includelib stdlib.lib

                dseg                segment    para public 'data'

                LStr1               byte       17,"This is a string."
                LResult             byte       256 dup (?)

                ZStr1               byte       "This is a string",0
                ZResult             byte       256 dup (?)

                dseg                ends


                cseg                segment    para public 'code'
                                    assume     cs:cseg, ds:dseg

                ; LStrCpy: Copies a length prefixed string pointed at by SI to
                ;          the length prefixed string pointed at by DI.

                LStrCpy             proc
                                    push       si
                                    push       di
                                    push       cx

                                    cld

                                    mov        cl, [si]        ;Get length of string.
                                    mov        ch, 0
                                    inc        cx              ;Include length byte.
                          rep       movsb

                                    pop        cx
                                    pop        di
                                    pop        si
                                    ret
                LStrCpy             endp

                ; LStrCat-          Concatenates the string pointed at by SI to the end
                ;                   of the string pointed at by DI using length
                ;                   prefixed strings.

                LStrCat             proc


Page 874
                                                         Strings and Character Sets

                 push     si
                 push     di
                 push     cx

                 cld

; Compute the final length of the concatenated string

                 mov      cl, [di]                ;Get orig length.
                 mov      ch, [si]                ;Get 2nd Length.
                 add      [di], ch                ;Compute new length.

; Move SI to the first byte beyond the end of the first string.

                 mov      ch, 0                   ;Zero extend orig len.
                 add      di, cx                  ;Skip past str.
                 inc      di                      ;Skip past length byte.

; Concatenate the second string (SI) to the end of the first string (DI)

          rep    movsb                            ;Copy 2nd to end of orig.

                 pop      cx
                 pop      di
                 pop      si
                 ret
LStrCat          endp

; LStrCmp-       String comparison using two length prefixed strings.
;                SI points at the first string, DI points at the
;                string to compare it against.

LStrCmp          proc
                 push     si
                 push     di
                 push     cx

                 cld

; When comparing the strings, we need to compare the strings
; up to the length of the shorter string. The following code
; computes the minimum length of the two strings.

                 mov      cl, [si]     ;Get the minimum of the two lengths
                 mov      ch, [di]
                 cmp      cl, ch
                 jb       HasMin
                 mov      cl, ch
HasMin:          mov      ch, 0

          repe   cmpsb                 ;Compare the two strings.
                 je       CmpLen
                 pop      cx
                 pop      di
                 pop      si
                 ret

; If the strings are equal through the length of the shorter string,
; we need to compare their lengths

CmpLen:          pop      cx
                 pop      di
                 pop      si

                 mov      cl, [si]
                 cmp      cl, [di]
                 ret
LStrCmp          endp

; ZStrCpy- Copies the zero terminated string pointed at by SI


                                                                         Page 875
Chapter 15

             ;            to the zero terminated string pointed at by DI.

             ZStrCpy            proc
                                push     si
                                push     di
                                push     ax

             ZSCLp:             mov      al, [si]
                                inc      si
                                mov      [di], al
                                inc      di
                                cmp      al, 0
                                jne      ZSCLp

                                pop      ax
                                pop      di
                                pop      si
                                ret
             ZStrCpy            endp


             ; ZStrCat-         Concatenates the string pointed at by SI to the end
             ;                  of the string pointed at by DI using zero terminated
             ;                  strings.

             ZStrCat            proc
                                push     si
                                push     di
                                push     cx
                                push     ax

                                cld

             ; Find the end of the destination string:

                                mov      cx, 0FFFFh
                                mov      al, 0        ;Look for zero byte.
                       repne    scasb

             ; Copy the source string to the end of the destination string:

             ZcatLp:            mov      al, [si]
                                inc      si
                                mov      [di], al
                                inc      di
                                cmp      al, 0
                                jne      ZCatLp

                                pop      ax
                                pop      cx
                                pop      di
                                pop      si
                                ret
             ZStrCat            endp

             ; ZStrCmp-         Compares two zero terminated strings.
             ;                  This is actually easier than the length
             ;                  prefixed comparison.

             ZStrCmp            proc
                                push     cx
                                push     si
                                push     di

             ;   Compare the two strings until they are not equal
             ;   or until we encounter a zero byte. They are equal
             ;   if we encounter a zero byte after comparing the
             ;   two characters from the strings.

             ZCmpLp:            mov      al, [si]


Page 876
                                                     Strings and Character Sets

             inc       si
             cmp       al, [di]
             jne       ZCmpDone
             inc       di
             cmp       al, 0
             jne       ZCmpLp

ZCmpDone:    pop       di
             pop       si
             pop       cx
             ret
ZStrCmp      endp


Main         proc
             mov       ax, dseg
             mov       ds, ax
             mov       es, ax
             meminit

             print
             byte      "The following code does 1,000,000 string "
             byte      "operations using",cr,lf
             byte      "length prefixed strings. Measure the amount "
             byte      "of time this code",cr,lf
             byte      "takes to run.",cr,lf,lf
             byte      "Press any key to begin:",0

             getc
             putcr

             mov       edx, 1000000
LStrCpyLp:   lea       si, LStr1
             lea       di, LResult
             call      LStrCpy
             call      LStrCat
             call      LStrCat
             call      LStrCat
             call      LStrCpy
             call      LStrCmp
             call      LStrCat
             call      LStrCmp

             dec       edx
             jne       LStrCpyLp

             print
             byte      "The following code does 1,000,000 string "
             byte      "operations using",cr,lf
             byte      "zero terminated strings. Measure the amount "
             byte      "of time this code",cr,lf
             byte      "takes to run.",cr,lf,lf
             byte      "Press any key to begin:",0

             getc
             putcr

             mov       edx, 1000000
ZStrCpyLp:   lea       si, ZStr1
             lea       di, ZResult
             call      ZStrCpy
             call      ZStrCat
             call      ZStrCat
             call      ZStrCat
             call      ZStrCpy
             call      ZStrCmp
             call      ZStrCat
             call      ZStrCmp

             dec       edx


                                                                     Page 877
Chapter 15

                                   jne         ZStrCpyLp

              Quit:                ExitPgm                     ;DOS macro to quit program.
              Main                 endp

              cseg                 ends

              sseg                 segment     para stack 'stack'
              stk                  db          1024 dup ("stack   ")
              sseg                 ends

              zzzzzzseg            segment     para public 'zzzzzz'
              LastBytes            db          16 dup (?)
              zzzzzzseg            ends
                                   end         Main



15.9     Programming Projects
    1)        Write a SubStr function that extracts a substring from a zero terminated string. Pass a
              pointer to the string in ds:si, a pointer to the destination string in es:di, the starting position
              in the string in ax, and the length of the substring in cx. Follow all the rules given in sec-
              tion 15.3.1 concerning degenerate conditions.
    2)        Write a word iterator (see “Iterators” on page 663) to which you pass a string (by reference,
              on the stack). Each each iteration of the corresponding foreach loop should extract a word
              from this string, malloc sufficient storage for this string on the heap, copy that word (sub-
              string) to the malloc’d location, and return a pointer to the word. Write a main program
              that calls the iterator with various strings to test it.
    3)        Modify the find.asm program (see “Find.asm” on page 860) so that it searches for the
              desired string in several files using ambiguous filenames (i.e., wildcard characters). See
              “Find First File” on page 729 for details about processing filenames that contain wildcard
              characters. You should write a loop that processes all matching filenames and executes the
              find.asm core code on each filename that matches the ambiguous filename a user supplies.
    4)        Write a strncpy routine that behaves like strcpy except it copies a maximum of n characters
              (including the zero terminating byte). Pass the source string’s address in es:di, the destina-
              tion string’s address in dx:si, and the maximum length in cx.
    5)        The movsb instruction may not work properly if the source and destination blocks overlap
              (see “The MOVS Instruction” on page 822). Write a procedure “bcopy” to which you pass
              the address of a source block, the address of a destination block, and a length, that will
              properly copy the data even if the source and destination blocks overlap. Do this by
              checking to see if the blocks overlap and adjusting the source pointer, destination pointer,
              and direction flag if necessary.
    6)        As you discovered in the lab experiments, the movsd instruction can move a block of data
              much faster than movsb or movsw can move that same block. Unfortunately, it can only
              move a block that contains an even multiple of four bytes. Write a “fastcopy” routine that
              uses the movsd instruction to copy all but the last one to three bytes of a source block to the
              destination block and then manually copies the remaining bytes between the blocks. Write
              a main program with several boundary test cases to verify correct operation. Compare the
              performance of your fastcopy procedure against the use of the movsb instruction.



15.10 Summary
                  The 80sx86 provides a powerful set of string instructions. However, these instructions
              are very primitive, useful mainly for manipulating blocks of bytes. They do not corre-
              spond to the string instructions one expects to find in a high level language. You can, how-
              ever, use the 80x86 string instructions to synthesize those functions normally associated
              with HLLs. This chapter explains how to construct many of the more popular string func-

Page 878
                                                                     Strings and Character Sets

tions. Of course, it’s foolish to constantly reinvent the wheel, so this chapter also describes
many of the string functions available in the UCR Standard Library.
    The 80x86 string instructions provide the basis for many of the string operations
appearing in this chapter. Therefore, this chapter begins with a review and in-depth dis-
cussion of the 80x86 string instructions: the repeat prefixes, and the direction flag. This
chapter discusses the operation of each of the string instructions and describes how you
can use each of them to perform string related tasks. To see how the 80x86 string instruc-
tions operate, check out the following sections:
        •   “The 80x86 String Instructions” on page 819
        •   “How the String Instructions Operate” on page 819
        •   “The REP/REPE/REPZ and REPNZ/REPNE Prefixes” on page 820
        •   “The Direction Flag” on page 821
        •   “The MOVS Instruction” on page 822
        •   “The CMPS Instruction” on page 826
        •   “The SCAS Instruction” on page 828
        •   “The STOS Instruction” on page 828
        •   “The LODS Instruction” on page 829
        •   “Building Complex String Functions from LODS and STOS” on page 830
        •   “Prefixes and the String Instructions” on page 830

     Although Intel calls them “string instructions” they do not actually work on the
abstract data type we normally think of as a character string. The string instructions sim-
ply manipulate arrays of bytes, words, or double words. It takes a little work to get these
instructions to deal with true character strings. Unfortunately, there isn’t a single defini-
tion of a character string which, no doubt, is the reason there aren’t any instructions spe-
cifically for character strings in the 80x86 instruction set. Two of the more popular
character string types include length prefixed strings and zero terminated strings which
Pascal and C use, respectively. Details on string formats appear in the following sections:
        •   “Character Strings” on page 831
        •   “Types of Strings” on page 831

    Once you decide on a specific data type for you character strings, the next step is to
implement various functions to process those strings. This chapter provides examples of
several different string functions designed specifically for length prefixed strings. To learn
about these functions and see the code that implements them, look at the following sec-
tions:
        •   “String Assignment” on page 832
        •   “String Comparison” on page 834
        •   “Character String Functions” on page 835
        •   “Substr” on page 835
        •   “Index” on page 838
        •   “Repeat” on page 840
        •   “Insert” on page 841
        •   “Delete” on page 843
        •   “Concatenation” on page 844

     The UCR Standard Library provides a very rich set of string functions specifically
designed for zero germinated strings. For a description of many of these routines, read the
following sections:
        •   “String Functions in the UCR Standard Library” on page 845
        •   “StrBDel, StrBDelm” on page 846
        •   “Strcat, Strcatl, Strcatm, Strcatml” on page 847
        •   “Strchr” on page 848
        •   “Strcmp, Strcmpl, Stricmp, Stricmpl” on page 848
        •   “Strcpy, Strcpyl, Strdup, Strdupl” on page 849

                                                                                      Page 879
Chapter 15

                     •   “Strdel, Strdelm” on page 850
                     •   “Strins, Strinsl, Strinsm, Strinsml” on page 851
                     •   “Strlen” on page 852
                     •   “Strlwr, Strlwrm, Strupr, Struprm” on page 852
                     •   “Strrev, Strrevm” on page 853
                     •   “Strset, Strsetm” on page 853
                     •   “Strspan, Strspanl, Strcspan, Strcspanl” on page 854
                     •   “Strstr, Strstrl” on page 855
                     •   “Strtrim, Strtrimm” on page 855
                     •   “Other String Routines in the UCR Standard Library” on page 856

                 As mentioned earlier, the string instructions are quite useful for many operations
             beyond character string manipulation. This chapter closes with some sections describing
             other uses for the string instructions. See
                     •   “Using the String Instructions on Other Data Types” on page 859
                     •   “Multi-precision Integer Strings” on page 859
                     •   “Dealing with Whole Arrays and Records” on page 860

                  The set is another common abstract data type commonly found in programs today. A
             set is a data structure which represent membership (or lack thereof) of some group of
             objects. If all objects are of the same underlying base type and there is a limited number of
             possible objects in the set, then we can use a bit vector (array of booleans) to represent the
             set. The bit vector implementation is very efficient for small sets. The UCR Standard
             Library provides several routines to manipulate character sets and other sets with a maxi-
             mum of 256 members. For more details,
                     •   “The Character Set Routines in the UCR Standard Library” on page 856




Page 880
                                                                                     Strings and Character Sets


15.11 Questions

  1)       What are the repeat prefixes used for?
  2)       Which string prefixes are used with the following instructions?
               a) MOVS      b) CMPS            c) STOS            d) SCAS
  3)       Why aren’t the repeat prefixes normally used with the LODS instruction?
  4)       What happens to the SI, DI, and CX registers when the MOVSB instruction is executed
           (without a repeat prefix) and:
               a) the direction flag is set.             b) the direction flag is clear.
  5)       Explain how the MOVSB and MOVSW instructions work. Describe how they affect mem-
           ory and registers with and without the repeat prefix. Describe what happens when the
           direction flag is set and clear.
  6)       How do you preserve the value of the direction flag across a procedure call?
  7)       How can you ensure that the direction flag always contains a proper value before a string
           instruction without saving it inside a procedure?
   8)      What is the difference between the “MOVSB”, “MOVSW”, and “MOVS oprnd1,oprnd2”
           instructions?
  9)       Consider the following Pascal array definition:
                                a:array [0..31] of record
                                           a,b,c:char;
                                           i,j,k:integer;
                                          end;

           Assuming A[0] has been initialized to some value, explain how you can use the MOVS
           instruction to initialize the remaining elements of A to the same value as A[0].
  10)      Give an example of a MOVS operation which requires the direction flag to be:
               a) clear               b) set
  11)      How does the CMPS instruction operate? (what does it do, how does it affect the registers
           and flags, etc.)
  12)      Which segment contains the source string? The destination string?
  13)      What is the SCAS instruction used for?
  14)      How would you quickly initialize an array to all zeros?
  15)      How are the LODS and STOS instructions used to build complex string operations?
  16)      How would you use the SUBSTR function to extract a substring of length 6 starting at off-
           set 3 in the StrVar variable, storing the substring in the NewStr variable?
  17)      What types of errors can occur when the SUBSTR function is executed?
  18)      Give an example demonstrating the use of each of the following string functions:
               a) INDEX     b) REPEAT          c) INSERT          d) DELETE         e) CONCAT
  19)      Write a short loop which multiplies each element of a single dimensional array by 10. Use
           the string instructions to fetch and store each array element.
  20)      The UCR Standard Library does not provide an STRCPYM routine. What is the routine
           which performs this task?
  21)      Suppose you are writing an “adventure game” into which the player types sentences and
           you want to pick out the two words “GO” and “NORTH”, if they are present, in the input
           line. What (non-UCR StdLib) string function appearing in this chapter would you use to
           search for these words? What UCR Standard Library routine would you use?
  22)      Explain how to perform an extended precision integer comparison using CMPS


                                                                                                     Page 881
Chapter 15




Page 882
