Pattern Matching                                                                      Chapter 16
                    The last chapter covered character strings and various operations on those strings. A
               very typical program reads a sequence of strings from the user and compares the strings
               to see if they match. For example, DOS’ COMMAND.COM program reads command lines
               from the user and compares the strings the user types to fixed strings like “COPY”,
               “DEL”, “RENAME”, and so on. Such commands are easy to parse because the set of
               allowable commands is finite and fixed. Sometimes, however, the strings you want to test
               for are not fixed; instead, they belong to a (possibly infinite) set of different strings. For
               example, if you execute the DOS command “DEL *.BAK”, MS-DOS does not attempt to
               delete a file named “*.BAK”. Instead, it deletes all files which match the generic pattern
               “*.BAK”. This, of course, is any file which contains four or more characters and ends with
               “.BAK”. In the MS-DOS world, a string containing characters like “*” and “?” are called
               wildcards; wildcard characters simply provide a way to specify different names via pat-
               terns. DOS’ wildcard characters are very limited forms of what are known as regular
               expressions; regular expressions are very limited forms of patterns in general. This chapter
               describes how to create patterns that match a variety of character strings and write pattern
               matching routines to see if a particular string matches a given pattern.



16.1     An Introduction to Formal Language (Automata) Theory
                    Pattern matching, despite its low-key coverage, is a very important topic in computer
               science. Indeed, pattern matching is the main programming paradigm in several pro-
               gramming languages like Prolog, SNOBOL4, and Icon. Several programs you use all the
               time employ pattern matching as a major part of their work. MASM, for example, uses
               pattern matching to determine if symbols are correctly formed, expressions are proper,
               and so on. Compilers for high level languages like Pascal and C also make heavy use of
               pattern matching to parse source files to determine if they are syntactically correct. Sur-
               prisingly enough, an important statement known as Church’s Hypothesis suggests that any
               computable function can be programmed as a pattern matching problem1. Of course,
               there is no guarantee that the solution would be efficient (they usually are not), but you
               could arrive at a correct solution. You probably wouldn’t need to know about Turing
               machines (the subject of Church’s hypothesis) if you’re interested in writing, say, an
               accounts receivable package. However, there many situations where you may want to
               introduce the ability to match some generic patterns; so understanding some of the theory
               of pattern matching is important. This area of computer science goes by the stuffy names
               of formal language theory and automata theory. Courses in these subjects are often less than
               popular because they involve a lot of proofs, mathematics, and, well, theory. However, the
               concepts behind the proofs are quite simple and very useful. In this chapter we will not
               bother trying to prove everything about pattern matching. Instead, we will accept the fact
               that this stuff really works and just apply it. Nonetheless, we do have to discuss some of
               the results from automata theory, so without further ado…



16.1.1     Machines vs. Languages
                    You will find references to the term “machine” throughout automata theory literature.
               This term does not refer to some particular computer on which a program executes.
               Instead, this is usually some function that reads a string of symbols as input and produces
               one of two outputs: match or failure. A typical machine (or automaton ) divides all possible
               strings into two sets – those strings that it accepts (or matches) and those string that it
               rejects. The language accepted by this machine is the set of all strings that the machine

   1. Actually, Church’s Hypothesis claims that any computable function can be computed on a Turing machine.
   However, the Turing machine is the ultimate pattern machine computer.


                                                                                                    Page 883

                         Thi d        t        t d ith F      M k   402
Chapter 16

                 accepts. Note that this language could be infinite, finite, or the empty set (i.e., the machine
                 rejects all input strings). Note that an infinite language does not suggest that the machine
                 accepts all strings. It is quite possible for the machine to accept an infinite number of
                 strings and reject an even greater number of strings. For example, it would be very easy to
                 design a function which accepts all strings whose length is an even multiple of three. This
                 function accepts an infinite number of strings (since there are an infinite number of strings
                 whose length is a multiple of three) yet it rejects twice as many strings as it accepts. This is
                 a very easy function to write. Consider the following 80x86 program that accepts all
                 strings of length three (we’ll assume that the carriage return character terminates a string):
                 MatchLen3            proc        near
                                      getc                        ;Get character #1.
                                      cmp         al, cr          ;Zero chars if EOLN.
                                      je          Accept
                                      getc                        ;Get character #2.
                                      cmp         al, cr
                                      je          Failure
                                      getc                        ;Get character #3.
                                      cmp         al, cr
                                      jne         MatchLen3
                 Failure:             mov         ax, 0           ;Return zero to denote failure.
                                      ret

                 Accept:              mov         ax, 1           ;Return one to denote success.
                                      ret
                 MatchLen3            endp

                 By tracing through this code, you should be able to easily convince yourself that it returns
                 one in ax if it succeeds (reads a string whose length is a multiple of three) and zero other-
                 wise.
                      Machines are inherently recognizers. The machine itself is the embodiment of a pattern.
                 It recognizes any input string which matches the built-in pattern. Therefore, a codification
                 of these automatons is the basic job of the programmer who wants tomatch some patterns.
                     There are many different classes of machines and the languages they recognize. From
                 simple to complex, the major classifications are deterministic finite state automata (which are
                 equivalent to nondeterministic finite state automata ), deterministic push down automata, nonde-
                 terministic push down automata, and Turing machines. Each successive machine in this list
                 provides a superset of the capabilities of the machines appearing before it. The only rea-
                 son we don’t use Turing machines for everything is because they are more complex to pro-
                 gram than, say, a deterministic finite state automaton. If you can match the pattern you
                 want using a deterministic finite state automaton, you’ll probably want to code it that way
                 rather than as a Turing machine.
                     Each class of machine has a class of languages associated with it. Deterministic and
                 nondeterministic finite state automata recognize the regular languages. Nondeterministic
                 push down automata recognize the context free languages2. Turing machines can recog-
                 nize all recognizable languages. We will discuss each of these sets of languages, and their
                 properties, in turn.



16.1.2       Regular Languages
                     The regular languages are the least complex of the languages described in the previ-
                 ous section. That does not mean they are less useful; in fact, patterns based on regular
                 expression are probably more common than any other.




    2. Deterministic push down automata recognize only a subset of the context free languages.


Page 884
                                                                                               Control Structures


16.1.2.1 Regular Expressions
                   The most compact way to specify the strings that belong to a regular language is with
               a regular expression. We shall define, recursively, a regular expression with the following
               rules:
                         •   ∅ (the empty set) is a regular language and denotes the empty set.
                         •   ε is a regular expression3. It denotes the set of languages containing only
                             the empty string: {ε}.
                         •   Any single symbol, a, is a regular expression (we will use lower case char-
                             acters to denote arbitrary symbols). This single symbol matches exactly
                             one character in the input string, that character must be equal to the sin-
                             gle symbol in the regular expression. For example, the pattern “m”
                             matches a single “m” character in the input string.
               Note that ∅ and ε are not the same. The empty set is a regular language that does not
               accept any strings, including strings of length zero. If a regular language is denoted by {ε},
               then it accepts exactly one string, the string of length zero. This latter regular language
               accepts something, the former does not.
                   The three rules above provide our basis for a recursive definition. Now we will define
               regular expressions recursively. In the following definitions, assume that r, s, and t are
               any valid regular expressions.
                         •   Concatenation. If r and s are regular expressions, so is rs. The regular
                             expression rs matches any string that begins with a string matched by r
                             and ends with a string matched by s.
                         •   Alternation/Union. If r and s are regular expressions, so is r | s (read
                             this as r or s ) This is equivalent to r ∪ s, (read as r union s ). This regular
                             expression matches any string that r or s matches.
                         •   Intersection. If r and s are regular expressions, so is r ∩ s. This is the set
                             of all strings that both r and s match.
                         •   Kleene Star. If r is a regular expression, so is r*. This regular expression
                             matches zero or more occurrences of r. That is, it matches ε, r, rr, rrr, rrrr,
                             ...
                         •   Difference. If r and s are regular expressions, so is r-s. This denotes the
                             set of strings matched by r that are not also matched by s.
                         •   Precedence. If r is a regular expression, so is (r ). This matches any string
                             matched by r alone. The normal algebraic associative and distributive
                             laws apply here, so (r | s ) t is equivalent to rt | st.
                   These operators following the normal associative and distributive laws and exhibit
               the following precedences:
               Highest:               (r)
                                      Kleene Star
                                      Concatentation
                                      Intersection
                                      Difference
               Lowest:                Alternation/Union

               Examples:
                         (r | s) t = rt | st
                         rs* = r(s*)
                         r ∪ t - s = r ∪ (t - s)
                         r ∩ t - s = (r ∩ t) - s

               Generally, we’ll use parenthesis to avoid any ambiguity
                   Although this definition is sufficient for an automata theory class, there are some
               practical aspects to this definition that leave a little to be desired. For example, to define a

  3. The empty string is the string of length zero, containing no symbols.


                                                                                                        Page 885
Chapter 16

             regular expression that matches a single alphabetic character, you would need to create
             something like (a | b | c | … | y | z ). Quite a lot of typing for such a trivial character set.
             Therefore, we shall add some notation to make it easier to specify regular expressions.
                      •     Character Sets. Any set of characters surrounded by brackets, e.g., [abc-
                            defg] is a regular expression and matches a single character from that set.
                            You can specify ranges of characters using a dash, i.e., “[a-z]” denotes the
                            set of lower case characters and this regular expression matches a single
                            lower case character.
                      •     Kleene Plus. If r is a regular expression, so is r+. This regular expression
                            matches one or more occurrences of r. That is, it matches r, rr, rrr, rrrr, …
                            The precedence of the Kleene Plus is the same as for the Kleene Star. Note
                            that r+ = rr*.
                      •     Σ represents any single character from the allowable character set. Σ* rep-
                            resents the set of all possible strings. The regular expression Σ*-r is the
                            complement of r – that is, the set of all strings that r does not match.
                 With the notational baggage out of the way, it’s time to discuss how to actually use
             regular expressions as pattern matching specifications. The following examples should
             give a suitable introduction.
             Identifiers:       Most programming languages like Pascal or C/C++ specify legal forms
                                for identifiers using a regular expression. Expressed in English terms, the
                                specification is something like “An identifier must begin with an alpha-
                                betic character and is followed by zero or more alphanumeric or under-
                                score characters.” Using the regular expression (RE) syntax described in
                                this section, an identifier is
                                [a-zA-Z][a-zA-Z0-9_]*
             Integer Consts: A regular expression for integer constants is relatively easy to design. An
                             integer constant consists of an optional plus or minus followed by one or
                             more digits. The RE is
                                (+ | - | ε ) [0-9]+
                      Note the use of the empty string (ε) to make the plus or minus optional.
             Real Consts:       Real constants are a bit more complex, but still easy to specify using REs.
                                Our definition matches that for a real constant appearing in a Pascal pro-
                                gram – an optional plus or minus, following by one or more digits;
                                optionally followed by a decimal point and zero or more digits; option-
                                ally followed by an “e” or an “E” with an optional sign and one or more
                                digits:
                                (+ | - | ε ) [0-9]+ ( “.” [0-9]* | ε ) (((e | E) (+ | - | ε ) [0-9]+) | ε )
                                Since this RE is relatively complex, we should dissect it piece by piece.
                                The first parenthetical term gives us the optional sign. One or more digits
                                are mandatory before the decimal point, the second term provides this.
                                The third term allows an optional decimal point followed by zero or more
                                digits. The last term provides for an optional exponent consisting of “e”
                                or “E” followed by an optional sign and one or more digits.
             Reserved Words: It is very easy to provide a regular expression that matches a set of
                           reserved words. For example, if you want to create a regular expression
                           that matches MASM’s reserved words, you could use an RE similar to the
                           following:
                                         ( mov | add | and | … | mul )
             Even:              The regular expression ( ΣΣ )* matches all strings whose length is a multi-
                                ple of two.
             Sentences:         The regular expression:
                                (Σ* “ “* )* run ( “ “+ ( Σ* “ “+ | ε )) fast (“ “ Σ* )*

Page 886
                                                                                                    Control Structures



                                                        0-9

                                            0-9

                                                        3     e                       e
                                                  "."                4                                 8
               +| - |e
           0                 1               2          e             e|E
                                   0-9
                                                                                                           e
                                                                         +| - |e
                                                                     5                    6             7
                                                                                              0-9



                                                                                                        0-9

Figure 16.1 NFA for Regular Expression (+ | - | e ) [0-9]+ ( “.” [0-9]* | e ) (((e | E) (+ | - | e ) [0-9]+) | e )

                                   matches all strings that contain the separate words “run” followed by
                                   “fast” somewhere on the line. This matches strings like “I want to run
                                   very fast” and “run as fast as you can” as well as “run fast.”

                     While REs are convenient for specifying the pattern you want to recognize, they are
                 not particularly useful for creating programs (i.e., “machines”) that actually recognize
                 such patterns. Instead, you should first convert an RE to a nondeterministic finite state
                 automaton, or NFA. It is very easy to convert an NFA into an 80x86 assembly language pro-
                 gram; however, such programs are rarely efficient as they might be. If efficiency is a big
                 concern, you can convert the NFA into a deterministic finite state automaton (DFA) that is
                 also easy to convert to 80x86 assembly code, but the conversion is usually far more effi-
                 cient.



16.1.2.2 Nondeterministic Finite State Automata (NFAs)
                      An NFA is a directed graph with state numbers associated with each node and charac-
                 ters or character strings associated with each edge of the graph. A distinguished state, the
                 starting state, determines where the machine begins attempting to match an input string.
                 With the machine in the starting state, it compares input characters against the characters
                 or strings on each edge of the graph. If a set of input characters matches one of the edges,
                 the machine can change states from the node at the start of the edge (the tail) to the state at
                 the end of the edge (the head).
                     Certain other states, known as final or accepting states, are usually present as well. If a
                 machine winds up in a final state after exhausting all the input characters, then that
                 machine accepts or matches that string. If the machine exhausts the input and winds up in
                 a state that is not a final state, then that machine rejects the string. Figure 16.1 shows an
                 example NFA for the floating point RE presented earlier.
                 By convention, we’ll always assume that the starting state is state zero. We will denote
                 final states (there may be more than one) by using a double circle for the state (state eight
                 is the final state above).
                     An NFA always begins with an input string in the starting state (state zero). On each
                 edge coming out of a state there is either ε, a single character, or a character string. To help
                 unclutter the NFA diagrams, we will allow expressions of the form “ xxx | yyy | zzz | …”
                 where xxx, yyy, and zzz are ε, a single character, or a character string. This corresponds to




                                                                                                               Page 887
Chapter 16

             multiple edges from one state to the other with a single item on each edge. In the example
             above,
                                               +| - |ε
                                           0                1

             is equivalent to
                                                  +

                                                   -
                                           0                1

                                                   ε

             Likewise, we will allow sets of characters, specified by a string of the form x-y, to denote
             the expression x | x+1 | x+2 | … | y.
                  Note that an NFA accepts a string if there is some path from the starting state to an
             accepting state that exhausts the input string. There may be multiple paths from the start-
             ing state to various final states. Furthermore, there may be some particular path from the
             starting state to a non-accepting state that exhausts the input string. This does not neces-
             sarily mean the NFA rejects that string; if there is some other path from the starting state
             to an accepting state, then the NFA accepts the string. An NFA rejects a string only if there
             are no paths from the starting state to an accepting state that exhaust the string.
                Passing through an accepting state does not cause the NFA to accept a string. You
             must wind up in a final state and exhaust the input string.
                  To process an input string with an NFA, begin at the starting state. The edges leading
             out of the starting state will have a character, a string, or ε associated with them. If you
             choose to move from one state to another along an edge with a single character, then
             remove that character from the input string and move to the new state along the edge tra-
             versed by that character. Likewise, if you choose to move along an edge with a character
             string, remove that character string from the input string and switch to the new state. If
             there is an edge with the empty string, ε, then you may elect to move to the new state
             given by that edge without removing any characters from the input string.
                  Consider the string “1.25e2” and the NFA in Figure 16.1. From the starting state we
             can move to state one using the ε string (there is no leading plus or minus, so ε is our only
             option). From state one we can move to state two by matching the “1” in our input string
             with the set 0-9; this eats the “1” in our input string leaving “.25e2”. In state two we move
             to state three and eat the period from the input string, leaving “25e2”. State three loops on
             itself with numeric input characters, so we eat the “2” and “5” characters at the beginning
             of our input string and wind up back in state three with a new input string of “e2”. The
             next input character is “e”, but there is no edge coming out of state three with an “e” on it;
             there is, however, an ε-edge, so we can use that to move to state four. This move does not
             change the input string. In state four we can move to state five on an “e” character. This
             eats the “e” and leaves us with an input string of “2”. Since this is not a plus or minus
             character, we have to move from state five to state six on the ε edge. Movement from state
             six to state seven eats the last character in our string. Since the string is empty (and, in par-
             ticular, it does not contain any digits), state seven cannot loop back on itself. We are cur-
             rently in state seven (which is not a final state) and our input string is exhausted.
             However, we can move to state eight (the accepting state) since the transition between
             states seven and eight is an ε edge. Since we are in a final state and we’ve exhausted the
             input string, This NFA accepts the input string.



16.1.2.3 Converting Regular Expressions to NFAs
                  If you have a regular expression and you want to build a machine that recognizes
             strings in the regular language specified by that expression, you will need to convert the

Page 888
                                                                                         Control Structures

RE to and NFA. It turns out to be very easy to convert a regular expression to an NFA. To
do so, just apply the following rules:
        •   The NFA representing regular language denoted by the regular expres-
            sion ∅ (the empty set) is a single, non-accepting state.
        •   If a regular expression contains an ε, a single character, or a string, create
            two states and draw an arc between them with ε, the single character, or
            the string as the label. For example, the RE “a” is converted to an NFA as
                                         a



        •   Let the symbol                                   denote an NFA which recognizes some reg-
            ular language specified by some regular expression r, s, or t. If a regular
            expression takes the form rs then the corresponding NFA is
                                         ε
                             r                                       s

        •   If a regular expression takes the form r | s, then the corresponding NFA is
                                                                 ε
                         ε                   r


                         ε                   s                   ε
        •   If a regular expression takes the form r* then the corresponding NFA is

                                             r
                                                         ε
                                     ε


All of the other forms of regular expressions are easily synthesized from these, therefore,
converting those other forms of regular expressions to NFAs is a simple two-step process,
convert the RE to one of these forms, and then convert this form to the NFA. For example,
to convert r+ to an NFA, you would first convert r+ to rr*. This produces the NFA:

                                                                     r
                                                                         ε
                                                             ε
                                 r                   ε


The following example converts the regular expression for an integer constant to an NFA.
The first step is to create an NFA for the regular expression (+ | - | ε ). The complete con-
struction becomes
                                                 +
                    ε                                                    ε
                    ε                            -                       ε

                    ε                            ε
                                                                         ε

Although we can obviously optimize this to
                                 +| - |ε




                                                                                                 Page 889
Chapter 16

             The next step is to handle the [0-9]+ regular expression; after some minor optimization,
             this becomes the NFA
                                                            0-9




                                                  0-9

             Now we simply concatenate the results to produce:
                                                                           0-9


                                +| - |ε             ε
                                                                  0-9

             All we need now are starting and final states. The starting state is always the first state of
             the NFA created by the conversion of the leftmost item in the regular expression. The final
             state is always the last state of the NFA created by the conversion of the rightmost item in
             the regular expression. Therefore, the complete regular expression for integer constants
             (after optimizing out the middle edge above, which serves no purpose) is


                                                                    0-9


                                       +| - |ε
                                   0                    1           2
                                                            0-9



16.1.2.4 Converting an NFA to Assembly Language
                 There is only one major problem with converting an NFA to an appropriate matching
             function – NFAs are nondeterministic. If you’re in some state and you’ve got some input
             character, say “a”, there is no guarantee that the NFA will tell you what to do next. For
             example, there is no requirement that edges coming out of a state have unique labels. You
             could have two or more edges coming out of a state, all leading to different states on the
             single character “a”. If an NFA accepts a string, it only guarantees that there is some path
             that leads to an accepting state, there is no guarantee that this path will be easy to find.
                 The primary technique you will use to resolve the nondeterministic behavior of an
             NFA is backtracking. A function that attempts to match a pattern using an NFA begins in
             the starting state and tries to match the first character(s) of the input string against the
             edges leaving the starting state. If there is only one match, the code must follow that edge.
             However, if there are two possible edges to follow, then the code must arbitrarily choose
             one of them and remember the others as well as the current point in the input string. Later, if it
             turns out the algorithm guessed an incorrect edge to follow, it can return back and try one
             of the other alternatives (i.e., it backtracks and tries a different path). If the algorithm
             exhausts all alternatives without winding up in a final state (with an empty input string),
             then the NFA does not accept the string.
                 Probably the easiest way to implement backtracking is via procedure calls. Let us
             assume that a matching procedure returns the carry flag set if it succeeds (i.e., accepts a




Page 890
                                                                                 Control Structures

string) and returns the carry flag clear if it fails (i.e., rejects a string). If an NFA offers mul-
tiple choices, you could implement that portion of the NFA as follows:

                         ε              r            ε
                         ε                           ε
                                        s

                         ε              t            ε

AltRST               proc        near
                     push        ax               ;The purpose of these two instructions
                     mov         ax, di           ; is to preserve di in case of failure.
                     call        r
                     jc          Success
                     mov         di, ax           ;Restore di (it may be modified by r).
                     call        s
                     jc          Success
                     mov         di, ax           ;Restore di (it may be modified by s).
                     call        t
Success:             pop         ax               ;Restore ax.
                     ret
AltRST               endp

If the r matching procedure succeeds, there is no need to try s and t. On the other hand, if r
fails, then we need to try s. Likewise, if r and s both fail, we need to try t. AltRST will fail
only if r, s, and t all fail. This code assumes that es:di points at the input string to match. On
return, es:di points at the next available character in the string after a match or it points at
some arbitrary point if the match fails. This code assumes that r, s, and t all preserve the ax
register, so it preserves a pointer to the current point in the input string in ax in the event r
or s fail.
    To handle the individual NFA associated with simple regular expressions (i.e., match-
ing ε or a single character) is not hard at all. Suppose the matching function r matches the
regular expression (+ | - | ε ). The complete procedure for r is
r                    proc        near
                     cmp         byte ptr es:[di], ‘+’
                     je          r_matched
                     cmp         byte ptr es:[di], ‘-’
                     jne         r_nomatch
r_matched:           inc         di
r_nomatch:           stc
                     ret
r                    endp

    Note that there is no explicit test for ε. If ε is one of the alternatives, the function
attempts to match one of the other alternatives first. If none of the other alternatives suc-
ceed, then the matching function will succeed anyway, although it does not consume any
input characters (which is why the above code skips over the inc di instruction if it does
not match “+” or “-”). Therefore, any matching function that has ε as an alternative will
always succeed.
    Of course, not all matching functions succeed in every case. Suppose the s matching
function accepts a single decimal digit. the code for s might be the following:
s                    proc        near
                     cmp         byte ptr es:[di], ‘0’
                     jb          s_fails
                     cmp         byte ptr es:[di], ‘9’
                     ja          s_fails
                     inc         di
                     stc
                     ret

s_fails:             clc
                     ret
s                    endp


                                                                                          Page 891
Chapter 16


                 If an NFA takes the form:
                                                    x
                                         r                     s

             Where x is any arbitrary character or string or ε, the corresponding assembly code for this
             procedure would be
             ConcatRxS            proc       near
                                  call       r
                                  jnc        CRxS_Fail                    ;If no r, we won’t succeed

             ; Note, if x=ε then simply delete the following three statements.
             ; If x is a string rather than a single character, put the the additional
             ; code to match all the characters in the string.

                                  cmp        byte ptr es:[di], ‘x’
                                  jne        CRxS_Fail
                                  inc        di

                                  call       s
                                  jnc        CRxS_Fail
                                  stc                        ;Success!
                                  ret

             CRxS_Fail:           clc
                                  ret
             ConcatRxS            endp

                 If the regular expression is of the form r* and the corresponding NFA is of the form

                                                     r
                                                         ε
                                                ε


             Then the corresponding 80x86 assembly code can look something like the following:
             RStar                proc       near
                                  call       r
                                  jc         RStar
                                  stc
                                  ret
             RStar                endp

             Regular expressions based on the Kleene star always succeed since they allow zero or
             more occurrences. That is why this code always returns with the carry flag set.
                 The Kleene Plus operation is only slightly more complex, the corresponding (slightly
             optimized) assembly code is
             RPlus                proc       near
                                  call       r
                                  jnc        RPlus_Fail
             RPlusLp:             call       r
                                  jc         RPlusLp
                                  stc
                                  ret

             RPlus_Fail:          clc
                                  ret
             RPlus                endp

             Note how this routine fails if there isn’t at least one occurrence of r.
                 A major problem with backtracking is that it is potentially inefficient. It is very easy to
             create a regular expression that, when converted to an NFA and assembly code, generates
             considerable backtracking on certain input strings. This is further exacerbated by the fact

Page 892
                                                                                       Control Structures

            that matching routines, if written as described above, are generally very short; so short, in
            fact, that the procedure calls and returns make up a significant portion of the execution
            time. Therefore, pattern matching in this fashion, although easy, can be slower than it has
            to be.
                This is just a taste of how you would convert REs to NFAs to assembly language. We
            will not go into further detail in this chapter; not because this stuff isn’t interesting to
            know, but because you will rarely use these techniques in a real program. If you need high
            performance pattern matching you would not use nondeterministic techniques like these.
            If you want the ease of programming offered by the conversion of an NFA to assembly
            language, you still would not use this technique. Instead, the UCR Standard Library pro-
            vides very powerful pattern matching facilities (which exceed the capabilities of NFAs), so
            you would use those instead; but more on that a little later.



16.1.2.5 Deterministic Finite State Automata (DFAs)
                 Nondeterministic finite state automata, when converted to actual program code, may
            suffer from performance problems because of the backtracking that occurs when match-
            ing a string. Deterministic finite state automata solve this problem by comparing different
            strings in parallel. Whereas, in the worst case, an NFA may require n comparisons, where
            n is the sum of the lengths of all the strings the NFA recognizes, a DFA requires only m
            comparisons (worst case), where m is the length of the longest string the DFA recognizes.
                For example, suppose you have an NFA that matches the following regular expres-
            sion (the set of 80x86 real-mode mnemonics that begin with an “A”):
                                 ( AAA | AAD | AAM | AAS | ADC | ADD | AND )
            A typical implementation as an NFA might look like the following:
            MatchAMnem          proc       near
                                strcmpl
                                byte       “AAA”,0
                                je         matched
                                strcmpl
                                byte       “AAD”,0
                                je         matched
                                strcmpl
                                byte       “AAM”,0
                                je         matched
                                strcmpl
                                byte       “AAS”,0
                                je         matched
                                strcmpl
                                byte       “ADC”,0
                                je         matched
                                strcmpl
                                byte       “ADD”,0
                                je         matched
                                strcmpl
                                byte       “AND”,0
                                je         matched
                                clc
                                ret

            matched:            add        di, 3
                                stc
                                ret
            MatchAMnem          endp
                If you pass this NFA a string that it doesn’t match, e.g., “AAND”, it must perform
            seven string comparisons, which works out to about 18 character comparisons (plus all
            the overhead of calling strcmpl). In fact, a DFA can determine that it does not match this
            character string by comparing only three characters.



                                                                                                Page 893
Chapter 16



                                                                               Σ



                                                                             3
                                            Σ - [0-9+-]
                                                       Σ - [0-9]
                                       +| -                        0-9
                                 0                 1                           Σ - [0-9]
                                                          0-9

                                            0-9
                                                                   2

 Figure 16.2 DFA for Regular Expression (+ | - | ε ) [0-9]+



                                               +| -                      0-9
                                        0                    1
                                                                   0-9

                                                    0-9
                                                                         2

 Figure 16.3 Simplified DFA for Regular Expression (+ | - | ε ) [0-9]+
                    A DFA is a special form of an NFA with two restrictions. First, there must be exactly
                one edge coming out of each node for each of the possible input characters; this implies
                that there must be one edge for each possible input symbol and you may not have two
                edges with the same input symbol. Second, you cannot move from one state to another on
                the empty string, ε. A DFA is deterministic because at each state the next input symbol
                determines the next state you will enter. Since each input symbol has an edge associated
                with it, there is never a case where a DFA “jams” because you cannot leave the state on
                that input symbol. Similarly, the new state you enter is never ambiguous because there is
                only one edge leaving any particular state with the current input symbol on it. Figure 16.2
                shows the DFA that handles integer constants described by the regular expression
                                 (+ | - | ε ) [0-9]+
                Note than an expression of the form “Σ - [0-9]“ means any character except a digit; that is,
                the complement of the set [0-9].
                     State three is a failure state. It is not an accepting state and once the DFA enters a fail-
                ure state, it is stuck there (i.e., it will consume all additional characters in the input string
                without leaving the failure state). Once you enter a failure state, the DFA has already
                rejected the input string. Of course, this is not the only way to reject a string; the DFA
                above, for example, rejects the empty string (since that leaves you in state zero) and it
                rejects a string containing only a “+” or a “-” character.
                     DFAs generally contain more states than a comparable NFA. To help keep the size of a
                DFA under control, we will allow a few shortcuts that, in no way, affect the operation of a
                DFA. First, we will remove the restriction that there be an edge associated with each possi-
                ble input symbol leaving every state. Most of the edges leaving a particular state lead to
                the failure state. Therefore, our first simplification will be to allow DFAs to drop the edges
                that lead to a failure state. If a input symbol is not represented on an outgoing edge from
                some state, we will assume that it leads to a failure state. The above DFA with this simpli-
                fication appears in Figure 16.2.




Page 894
                                                                                       Control Structures




                                                        2
                                                               d
                                            n

                                    a           a           a|d|m|s
                            0           1               3                    5


                                            d
                                                                c|d
                                                        4


Figure 16.4 DFA that Recognizes AND, AAA, AAD, AAM, AAS, ADD, and ADC
                A second shortcut, that is actually present in the two examples above, is to allow sets
            of characters (or the alternation symbol, “|”) to associate several characters with a single
            edge. Finally, we will also allow strings attached to an edge. This is a shorthand notation
            for a list of states which recognize each successive character, i.e., the following two DFAs
            are equivalent:
                                                    abc




                                a                   b                 c


                Returning to the regular expression that recognizes 80x86 real-mode mnemonics
            beginning with an “A”, we can construct a DFA that recognizes such strings as shown in
            Figure 16.4.
            If you trace through this DFA by hand on several accepting and rejecting strings, you will
            discover than it requires no more than six character comparisons to determine whether
            the DFA should accept or reject an input string.
                 Although we are not going to discuss the specifics here, it turns out that regular
            expressions, NFAs, and DFAs are all equivalent. That is, you can convert anyone of these
            to the others. In particular, you can always convert an NFA to a DFA. Although the con-
            version isn’t totally trivial, especially if you want an optimized DFA, it is always possible
            to do so. Converting between all these forms is beginning to leave the scope of this text. If
            you are interested in the details, any text on formal languages or automata theory will fill
            you in.



16.1.2.6 Converting a DFA to Assembly Language
                It is relatively straightforward to convert a DFA to a sequence of assembly instruc-
            tions. For example, the assembly code for the DFA that accepts the A-mnemonics in the
            previous section is
            DFA_A_Mnem          proc            near
                                cmp             byte    ptr es:[di], ‘A’
                                jne             Fail
                                cmp             byte    ptr es:[di+1], ‘A’
                                je              DoAA
                                cmp             byte    ptr es:[di+1], ‘D’
                                je              DoAD
                                cmp             byte    ptr es:[di+1], ‘N’
                                je              DoAN


                                                                                                Page 895
Chapter 16

             Fail:               clc
                                 ret

             DoAN:               cmp        byte ptr es:[di+2], ‘D’
                                 jne        Fail
             Succeed:            add        di, 3
                                 stc
                                 ret

             DoAD:               cmp        byte ptr es:[di+2], ‘D’
                                 je         Succeed
                                 cmp        byte ptr es:[di+2], ‘C’
                                 je         Succeed
                                 clc                                             ;Return Failure
                                 ret

             DoAA:               cmp        byte ptr   es:[di+2], ‘A’
                                 je         Succeed
                                 cmp        byte ptr   es:[di+2], ‘D’
                                 je         Succeed
                                 cmp        byte ptr   es:[di+2], ‘M’
                                 je         Succeed
                                 cmp        byte ptr   es:[di+2], ‘S’
                                 je         Succeed
                                 clc
                                 ret
             DFA_A_Mnem          endp
                  Although this scheme works and is considerably more efficient than the coding
             scheme for NFAs, writing this code can be tedious, especially when converting a large
             DFA to assembly code. There is a technique that makes converting DFAs to assembly code
             almost trivial, although it can consume quite a bit of space – to use state machines. A sim-
             ple state machine is a two dimensional array. The columns are indexed by the possible
             characters in the input string and the rows are indexed by state number (i.e., the states in
             the DFA). Each element of the array is a new state number. The algorithm to match a given
             string using a state machine is trivial, it is
             state := 0;
             while (another input character ) do begin

                     ch := next input character ;
                     state := StateTable [state][ch];

             end;
             if (state in FinalStates) then accept
             else reject;

             FinalStates is a set of accepting states. If the current state number is in this set after the
             algorithm exhausts the characters in the string, then the state machine accepts the string,
             otherwise it rejects the string.
                 The following state table corresponds to the DFA for the “A” mnemonics appearing in
             the previous section:




Page 896
                                                                                     Control Structures



            Table 62: State Machine for 80x86 “A” Instructions DFA
State          A            C             D           M           N          S           Else
 0             1            F             F           F           F          F             F
 1             3            F             4           F           2          F             F
 2             F            F             5           F           F          F             F
 3             5            F             5           5           F          5             F
 4             F            5             5           F           F          F             F
 5             F            F             F           F           F          F             F
 F             F            F             F           F           F          F             F

        State five is the only accepting state.
             There is one major drawback to using this table driven scheme – the table will be quite
        large. This is not apparent in the table above because the column labelled “Else” hides
        considerable detail. In a true state table, you will need one column for each possible input
        character. since there are 256 possible input characters (or at least 128 if you’re willing to
        stick to seven bit ASCII), the table above will have 256 columns. With only one byte per
        element, this works out to about 2K for this small state machine. Larger state machines
        could generate very large tables.
            One way to reduce the size of the table at a (very) slight loss in execution speed is to
        classify the characters before using them as an index into a state table. By using a single
        256-byte lookup table, it is easy to reduce the state machine to the table above. Consider
        the 256 byte lookup table that contains:
                   •   A one at positions Base+”a” and Base+”A”,
                   •   A two at locations Base+”c” and Base+”C”,
                   •   A three at locations Base+”d” and Base+”D”,
                   •   A four at locations Base+”m” and Base+”M”,
                   •   A five at locations Base+”n” and Base+”N”,
                   •   A six at locations Base+”s” and Base+”S”, and
                   •   A zero everywhere else.
        Now we can modify the above table to produce:

  Table 63: Classified State Machine Table for 80x86 “A” Instructions DFA
         State         0        1     2           3       4   5        6         7
           0           6        1     6           6       6   6        6         6
           1           6        3     6           4       6   2        6         6
           2           6        6     6           5       6   6        6         6
           3           6        5     6           5       5   6        5         6
           4           6        6     5           5       6   6        6         6
           5           6        6     6           6       6   6        6         6
           6           6        6     6           6       6   6        6         6

        The table above contains an extra column, “7”, that we will not use. The reason for adding
        the extra column is to make it easy to index into this two dimensional array (since the
        extra column lets us multiply the state number by eight rather than seven).
            Assuming Classify is the name of the lookup table, the following 80386 code recog-
        nizes the strings specified by this DFA:




                                                                                               Page 897
Chapter 16

             DFA2_A_Mnem         proc
                                 push       ebx                                   ;Ptr to Classify.
                                 push       eax                                   ;Current character.
                                 push       ecx                                   ;Current state.
                                 xor        eax, eax                              ;EAX := 0
                                 mov        ebx, eax                              ;EBX := 0
                                 mov        ecx, eax                              ;ECX (state) := 0
                                 lea        bx, Classify
             WhileNotEOS:        mov        al, es:[di]                           ;Get next input char.
                                 cmp        al, 0                                 ;At end of string?
                                 je         AtEOS
                                 xlat                                             ;Classify character.
                                 mov        cl, State_Tbl[eax+ecx*8]              ;Get new state #.
                                 inc        di                                    ;Move on to next char.
                                 jmp        WhileNotEOS

             AtEOS:              cmp        cl, 5                                 ;In accepting state?
                                 stc                                              ;Assume acceptance.
                                 je         Accept
                                 clc
             Accept:             pop        ecx
                                 pop        eax
                                 pop        ebx
                                 ret
             DFA2_A_Mnem         endp

                 The nice thing about this DFA (the DFA is the combination of the classification table,
             the state table, and the above code) is that it is very easy to modify. To handle any other
             state machine (with eight or fewer character classifications) you need only modify the
             Classification array, the State_Tbl array, the lea bx, Classify statement and the statements at
             label AtEOS that determine if the machine is in a final state. The assembly code does not
             get more complex as the DFA grows in size. The State_Tbl array will get larger as you add
             more states, but this does not affect the assembly code.
             Of course, the assembly code above does assume there are exactly eight columns in the
             matrix. It is easy to generalize this code by inserting an appropriate imul instruction to
             multiply by the size of the array. For example, had we gone with seven columns rather
             than eight, the code above would be
             DFA2_A_Mnem         proc
                                 push       ebx                                   ;Ptr to Classify.
                                 push       eax                                   ;Current character.
                                 push       ecx                                   ;Current state.
                                 xor        eax, eax                              ;EAX := 0
                                 mov        ebx, eax                              ;EBX := 0
                                 mov        ecx, eax                              ;ECX (state) := 0
                                 lea        bx, Classify
             WhileNotEOS:        mov        al, es:[di]                           ;Get next input char.
                                 cmp        al, 0                                 ;At end of string?
                                 je         AtEOS
                                 xlat                                             ;Classify character.
                                 imul       cx, 7
                                 movzx      ecx, State_Tbl[eax+ecx]               ;Get new state #.
                                 inc        di                                    ;Move on to next char.
                                 jmp        WhileNotEOS

             AtEOS:              cmp        cl, 5                                 ;In accepting state?
                                 stc                                              ;Assume acceptance.
                                 je         Accept
                                 clc
             Accept:             pop        ecx
                                 pop        eax
                                 pop        ebx
                                 ret
             DFA2_A_Mnem         endp

                 Although using a state table in this manner simplifies the assembly coding, it does
             suffer from two drawbacks. First, as mentioned earlier, it is slower. This technique has to


Page 898
                                                                             Control Structures

   execute all the statements in the while loop for each character it matches; and those
   instructions are not particularly fast ones, either. The second drawback is that you’ve got
   to create the state table for the state machine; that process is tedious and error prone.
        If you need the absolute highest performance, you can use the state machine tech-
   niques described in (see “State Machines and Indirect Jumps” on page 529). The trick here
   is to represent each state with a short segment of code and its own one dimensional state
   table. Each entry in the table is the target address of the segment of code representing the
   next state. The following is an example of our “A Mnemonic” state machine written in this
   fashion. The only difference is that the zero byte is classified to value seven (zero marks
   the end of the string, we will use this to determine when we encounter the end of the
   string). The corresponding state table would be:

Table 64: Another State Machine Table for 80x86 “A” Instructions DFA
     State     0       1       2        3        4      5        6       7
      0        6       1       6        6        6      6        6       6
      1        6       3       6        4        6      2        6       6
      2        6       6       6        5        6      6        6       6
      3        6       5       6        5        5      6        5       6
      4        6       6       5        5        6      6        6       6
      5        6       6       6        6        6      6        6       5
      6        6       6       6        6        6      6        6       6



       The 80x86 code is
   DFA3_A_Mnem         proc
                       push        ebx
                       push        eax
                       push        ecx
                       xor         eax, eax

                       lea         ebx, Classify
   State0:             mov         al, es:[di]
                       xlat
                       inc         di
                       jmp         cseg:State0Tbl[eax*2]

   State0Tbl           word        State6, State1, State6, State6
                       word        State6, State6, State6, State6

   State1:             mov         al, es:[di]
                       xlat
                       inc         di
                       jmp         cseg:State1Tbl[eax*2]

   State1Tbl           word        State6, State3, State6, State4
                       word        State6, State2, State6, State6

   State2:             mov         al, es:[di]
                       xlat
                       inc         di
                       jmp         cseg:State2Tbl[eax*2]

   State2Tbl           word        State6, State6, State6, State5
                       word        State6, State6, State6, State6

   State3:             mov         al, es:[di]
                       xlat
                       inc         di
                       jmp         cseg:State3Tbl[eax*2]



                                                                                      Page 899
Chapter 16

                 State3Tbl             word        State6, State5, State6, State5
                                       word        State5, State6, State5, State6

                 State4:               mov         al, es:[di]
                                       xlat
                                       inc         di
                                       jmp         cseg:State4Tbl[eax*2]

                 State4Tbl             word        State6, State6, State5, State5
                                       word        State6, State6, State6, State6

                 State5:               mov         al, es:[di]
                                       cmp         al, 0
                                       jne         State6
                                       stc
                                       pop         ecx
                                       pop         eax
                                       pop         ebx
                                       ret

                 State6:               clc
                                       pop         ecx
                                       pop         eax
                                       pop         ebx
                                       ret

                       There are two important features you should note about this code. First, it only exe-
                 cutes four instructions per character comparison (fewer, on the average, than the other
                 techniques). Second, the instant the DFA detects failure it stops processing the input char-
                 acters. The other table driven DFA techniques blindly process the entire string, even after
                 it is obvious that the machine is locked in a failure state.
                     Also note that this code treats the accepting and failure states a little differently than
                 the generic state table code. This code recognizes the fact that once we’re in state five it
                 will either succeed (if EOS is the next character) or fail. Likewise, in state six this code
                 knows better than to try searching any farther.
                     Of course, this technique is not as easy to modify for different DFAs as a simple state
                 table version, but it is quite a bit faster. If you’re looking for speed, this is a good way to
                 code a DFA.



16.1.3       Context Free Languages
                      Context free languages provide a superset of the regular languages – if you can spec-
                 ify a class of patterns with a regular expression, you can express the same language using
                 a context free grammar. In addition, you can specify many languages that are not regular
                 using context free grammars (CFGs).
                      Examples of languages that are context free, but not regular, include the set of all
                 strings representing common arithmetic expressions, legal Pascal or C source files4, and
                 MASM macros. Context free languages are characterized by balance and nesting. For
                 example, arithmetic expression have balanced sets of parenthesis. High level language
                 statements like repeat…until allow nesting and are always balanced (e.g., for every repeat
                 there is a corresponding until statement later in the source file).
                     There is only a slight extension to the regular languages to handle context free lan-
                 guages – function calls. In a regular expression, we only allow the objects we want to
                 match and the specific RE operators like “|”, “*”, concatenation, and so on. To extend reg-
                 ular languages to context free languages, we need only add recursive function calls to reg-
                 ular expressions. Although it would be simple to create a syntax allowing function calls


    4. Actually, C and Pascal are not context free languages, but Computer Scientists like to treat them as though they
    were.


Page 900
                                                                           Control Structures

within a regular expression, computer scientists use a different notation altogether for
context free languages – a context free grammar.
    A context free grammar contains two types of symbols: terminal symbols and nontermi-
nal symbols. Terminal symbols are the individual characters and strings that the context
free grammar matches plus the empty string, ε. Context free grammars use nonterminal
symbols for function calls and definitions. In our context free grammars we will use italic
characters to denote nonterminal symbols and standard characters to denote terminal
symbols.
    A context free grammar consists of a set of function definitions known as productions.
A production takes the following form:
Function_Name → «list of terminal and nonterminal symbols»
The function name to the left hand side of the arrow is called the left hand side of the pro-
duction. The function body, which is the list of terminals and nonterminal symbols, is
called the right hand side of the production. The following is a grammar for simple arith-
metic expressions:
expression → expression + factor
expression → expression - factor
expression → factor
factor → factor * term
factor → factor / term
factor → term
term → IntegerConstant
term → ( expression )
IntegerConstant → digit
IntegerConstant → digit IntegerConstant
digit → 0
digit → 1
digit → 2
digit → 3
digit → 4
digit → 5
digit → 6
digit → 7
digit → 8
digit → 9
     Note that you may have multiple definitions for the same function. Context-free
grammars behave in a non-deterministic fashion, just like NFAs. When attempting to
match a string using a context free grammar, a string matches if there exists some match-
ing function which matches the current input string. Since it is very common to have mul-
tiple productions with identical left hand sides, we will use the alternation symbol from
the regular expressions to reduce the number of lines in the grammar. The following two
subgrammars are identical:
expression → expression + factor
expression → expression - factor
expression → factor
The above is equivalent to:
expression → expression + factor         |   expression - factor     |   factor
The full arithmetic grammar, using this shorthand notation, is
expression → expression + factor | expression - factor               |   factor
factor → factor * term | factor / term | term
term → IntegerConstant | ( expression )


                                                                                    Page 901
Chapter 16

             IntegerConstant → digit | digit IntegerConstant
             digit → 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7                           |   8   |   9

                  One of the nonterminal symbols, usually the first production in the grammar, is the
             starting symbol. This is roughly equivalent to the starting state in a finite state automaton.
             The starting symbol is the first matching function you call when you want to test some
             input string to see if it is a member of a context free language. In the example above,
             expression is the starting symbol.
                 Much like the NFAs and DFAs recognize strings in a regular language specified by a
             regular expression, nondeterministic pushdown automata and deterministic pushdown
             automata recognize strings belonging to a context free language specified by a context free
             grammar. We will not go into the details of these pushdown automata (or PDAs ) here, just
             be aware of their existence. We can match strings directly with a grammar. For example,
             consider the string
                                                      7+5*(2+1)
             To match this string, we begin by calling the starting symbol function, expression, using the
             function expression → expression + factor. The first plus sign suggests that the
             expression term must match “7” and the factor term must match “5*(2+1)”. Now we need
             to match our input string with the pattern expression + factor. To do this, we call the
             expression function once again, this time using the expression → factor production.
             This give us the reduction:
                             expression ⇒ expression + factor ⇒ factor + factor
             The ⇒ symbol denotes the application of a nonterminal function call (a reduction).
                 Next, we call the factor function, using the production factor → term to yield the
             reduction:
                   expression ⇒ expression + factor ⇒ factor + factor ⇒ term + factor
             Continuing, we call the term function to produce the reduction:
             expression ⇒ expression + factor ⇒ factor + factor ⇒ term + factor ⇒ Inte-
                                         gerConstant + factor
             Next, we call the IntegerConstant function to yield:
             expression ⇒ expression + factor ⇒ factor + factor ⇒ term + factor ⇒ Inte-
                                  gerConstant + factor ⇒ 7 + factor
             At this point, the first two symbols of our generated string match the first two characters
             of the input string, so we can remove them from the input and concentrate on the items
             that follow. In succession, we call the factor function to produce the reduction 7 + factor
             * term and then we call factor, term, and IntegerConstant to yield 7 + 5 * term. In a simi-
             lar fashion, we can reduce the term to “( expression )” and reduce expression to “2+1”. The
             complete derivation for this string is




Page 902
                                                                                          Control Structures

            expression       ⇒   expression + factor
                             ⇒   factor + factor
                             ⇒   term + factor
                             ⇒   IntegerConstant + factor
                             ⇒   7 + factor
                             ⇒   7 + factor * term
                             ⇒   7 + term * term
                             ⇒   7 + IntegerConstant * term
                             ⇒   7 + 5 * term
                             ⇒   7 + 5 * ( expression )
                             ⇒   7 + 5 * ( expression + factor )
                             ⇒   7 + 5 * ( factor + factor )
                             ⇒   7 + 5 * ( IntegerConstant + factor )
                             ⇒   7 + 5 * ( 2 + factor )
                             ⇒   7 + 5 * ( 2 + term )
                             ⇒   7 + 5 * ( 2 + IntegerConstant )
                             ⇒   7 + 5 * ( 2 + 1)
            The final reduction completes the derivation of our input string, so the string 7+5*(2+1) is
            in the language specified by the context free grammar.



16.1.4   Eliminating Left Recursion and Left Factoring CFGs
                In the next section we will discuss how to convert a CFG to an assembly language
            program. However, the technique we are going to use to do this conversion will require
            that we modify certain grammars before converting them. The arithmetic expression
            grammar in the previous section is a good example of such a grammar – one that is left
            recursive.
                Left recursive grammars pose a problem for us because the way we will typically con-
            vert a production to assembly code is to call a function corresponding to a nonterminal
            and compare against the terminal symbols. However, we will run into trouble if we
            attempt to convert a production like the following using this technique:
                                        expression → expression + factor
            Such a conversion would yield some assembly code that looks roughly like the following:
            expression           proc       near
                                 call       expression
                                 jnc        fail
                                 cmp        byte ptr es:[di], ‘+’
                                 jne        fail
                                 inc        di
                                 call       factor
                                 jnc        fail
                                 stc
                                 ret
            Fail:                clc
                                 ret
            expression           endp
            The obvious problem with this code is that it will generate an infinite loop. Upon entering
            the expression function this code immediately calls expression recursively, which immedi-
            ately calls expression recursively, which immediately calls expression recursively, ... Clearly,
            we need to resolve this problem if we are going to write any real code to match this pro-
            duction.
                 The trick to resolving left recursion is to note that if there is a production that suffers
            from left recursion, there must be some production with the same left hand side that is not
            left recursive5. All we need do is rewrite the left recursive call in terms of the production


                                                                                                  Page 903
Chapter 16

                  that does not have any left recursion. This sound like a difficult task, but it’s actually quite
                  easy.
                      To see how to eliminate left recursion, let Xi and Yj represent any set of terminal sym-
                  bols or nonterminal symbols that do not have a right hand side beginning with the nonter-
                  minal A. If you have some productions of the form:
                                          A → AX1 | AX2 | … | AXn | Y1 | Y2 | … | Ym

                  You will be able to translate this to an equivalent grammar without left recursion by
                  replacing each term of the form A →Yi by A →Yi A and each term of the form A →AXi by
                  A’ →Xi A’ | ε. For example, consider three of the productions from the arithmetic grammar:
                  expression → expression + factor
                  expression → expression - factor
                  expression → factor
                  In this example A corresponds to expression, X1 corresponds to “+ factor ”, X2 corresponds
                  to “- factor ”, and Y1 corresponds to “factor ”. The equivalent grammar without left recur-
                  sion is
                  expression → factor E’
                  E’ → - factor E’
                  E’ → + factor E’
                  E’ → ε


                      The complete arithmetic grammar, with left recursion removed, is
                  expression → factor E’
                  E’ → + factor E’ | - factor E’ | ε
                  factor → term F’
                  F’ → * term F’ | / term F’ | ε
                  term → IntegerConstant | ( expression )
                  IntegerConstant → digit | digit IntegerConstant
                  digit → 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7                                 |   8   |   9


                      Another useful transformation on a grammar is to left factor the grammar. This can
                  reduce the need for backtracking, improving the performance of your pattern matching
                  code. Consider the following CFG fragment:
                  stmt → if expression then stmt endif
                  stmt → if expression then stmt else stmt endif
                  These two productions begin with the same set of symbols. Either production will match
                  all the characters in an if statement up to the point the matching algorithm encounters the
                  first else or endif. If the matching algorithm processes the first statement up to the point of
                  the endif terminal symbol and encounters the else terminal symbol instead, it must back-
                  track all the way to the if symbol and start over. This can be terribly inefficient because of
                  the recursive call to stmt (imagine a 10,000 line program that has a single if statement
                  around the entire 10,000 lines, a compiler using this pattern matching technique would
                  have to recompile the entire program from scratch if it used backtracking in this fashion).
                  However, by left factoring the grammar before converting it to program code, you can
                  eliminate the need for backtracking.
                      To left factor a grammar, you collect all productions that have the same left hand side
                  and begin with the same symbols on the right hand side. In the two productions above,
                  the common symbols are “if expression then stmt “. You combine the common strings into a
                  single production and then append a new nonterminal symbol to the end of this new pro-
                  duction, e.g.,


    5. If this is not the case, the grammar does not match any finite length strings.


Page 904
                                                                                            Control Structures

            stmt → if expression then stmt NewNonTerm
            Finally, you create a new set of productions using this new nonterminal for each of the
            suffixes to the common production:
            NewNonTerm → endif | else stmt endif
            This eliminates backtracking because the matching algorithm can process the if, the expres-
            sion, the then, and the stmt before it has to choose between endif and else.



16.1.5   Converting REs to CFGs
               Since the context free languages are a superset of the regular languages, it should
            come as no surprise that it is possible to convert regular expressions to context free gram-
            mars. Indeed, this is a very easy process involving only a few intuitive rules.
            1) If a regular expression simply consists of a sequence of characters, xyz, you can easily
               create a production for this regular expression of the form P → xyz. This applies
               equally to the empty string, ε.
            2) If r and s are two regular expression that you’ve converted to CFG productions R
               and S , and you have a regular expression rs that you want to convert to a production,
               simply create a new production of the form T → R S.
            3) If r and s are two regular expression that you’ve converted to CFG productions R
               and S , and you have a regular expression r | s that you want to convert to a produc-
               tion, simply create a new production of the form T → R | S.
            4) If r is a regular expression that you’ve converted to a production, R, and you want to
               create a production for r*, simply use the production RStar → R RStar | ε.
            5) If r is a regular expression that you’ve converted to a production, R, and you want to
               create a production for r+, simply use the production RPlus → R RPlus | R.
            6) For regular expressions there are operations with various precedences. Regular
               expressions also allow parenthesis to override the default precedence. This notion of
               precedence does not carry over into CFGs. Instead, you must encode the precedence
               directly into the grammar. For example, to encode R S* you would probably use pro-
               ductions of the form:
                                 T → R SStar
                                 SStar → S SStar | ε
                Likewise, to handle a grammar of the form (RS )* you could use productions of the
                form:
                                 T →RS T |ε
                                 RS → R S



16.1.6   Converting CFGs to Assembly Language
                If you have removed left recursion and you’ve left factored a grammar, it is very easy
            to convert such a grammar to an assembly language program that recognizes strings in
            the context free language.
                The first convention we will adopt is that es:di always points at the start of the string
            we want to match. The second convention we will adopt is to create a function for each
            nonterminal. This function returns success (carry set) if it matches an associated subpat-
            tern, it returns failure (carry clear) otherwise. If it succeeds, it leaves di pointing at the next
            character is the staring after the matched pattern; if it fails, it preserves the value in di
            across the function call.
                To convert a set of productions to their corresponding assembly code, we need to be
            able to handle four things: terminal symbols, nonterminal symbols, alternation, and the

                                                                                                     Page 905
Chapter 16

             empty string. First, we will consider simple functions (nonterminals) which do not have
             multiple productions (i.e., alternation).
                 If a production takes the form T → ε and there are no other productions associated
             with T, then this production always succeeds. The corresponding assembly code is simply:
             T                   proc       near
                                 stc
                                 ret
             T                   endp
             Of course, there is no real need to ever call T and test the returned result since we know it
             will always succeed. On the other hand, if T is a stub that you intend to fill in later, you
             should call T.
                  If a production takes the form T → xyz, where xyz is a string of one or more terminal
             symbols, then the function returns success if the next several input characters match xyz,
             it returns failure otherwise. Remember, if the prefix of the input string matches xyz, then
             the matching function must advance di beyond these characters. If the first characters of
             the input string does not match xyz, it must preserve di. The following routines demon-
             strate two cases, where xyz is a single character and where xyz is a string of characters:
             T1                  proc       near
                                 cmp        byte ptr es:[di], ‘x’                ;Single char.
                                 je         Success
                                 clc                                             ;Return Failure.
                                 ret

             Success:            inc        di                                   ;Skip matched char.
                                 stc                                             ;Return success.
                                 ret
             T1                  endp


             T2                  proc       near
                                 call       MatchPrefix
                                 byte       ‘xyz’,0
                                 ret
             T2                  endp

             MatchPrefix is a routine that matches the prefix of the string pointed at by es:di against the
             string following the call in the code stream. It returns the carry set and adjusts di if the
             string in the code stream is a prefix of the input string, it returns the carry flag clear and
             preserves di if the literal string is not a prefix of the input. The MatchPrefix code follows:
             MatchPrefix         proc       far             ;Must be far!
                                 push       bp
                                 mov        bp, sp
                                 push       ax
                                 push       ds
                                 push       si
                                 push       di

                                 lds        si, 2[bp]       ;Get the return address.
             CmpLoop:            mov        al, ds:[si]     ;Get string to match.
                                 cmp        al, 0           ;If at end of prefix,
                                 je         Success         ; we succeed.
                                 cmp        al, es:[di]     ;See if it matches prefix,
                                 jne        Failure         ; if not, immediately fail.
                                 inc        si
                                 inc        di
                                 jmp        CmpLoop

             Success:            add        sp, 2           ;Don’t restore di.
                                 inc        si              ;Skip zero terminating byte.
                                 mov        2[bp], si       ;Save as return address.
                                 pop        si
                                 pop        ds
                                 pop        ax


Page 906
                                                                             Control Structures

                    pop        bp
                    stc                        ;Return success.
                    ret

Failure:            inc        si                           ;Need to skip to zero byte.
                    cmp        byte ptr ds:[si], 0
                    jne        Failure
                    inc        si
                    mov        2[bp], si                    ;Save as return address.

                    pop        di
                    pop        si
                    pop        ds
                    pop        ax
                    pop        bp
                    clc                                     ;Return failure.
                    ret
MatchPrefix         endp

     If a production takes the form T → R, where R is a nonterminal, then the T function
calls R and returns whatever status R returns, e.g.,
T                   proc       near
                    call       R
                    ret
T                   endp

    If the right hand side of a production contains a string of terminal and nonterminal
symbols, the corresponding assembly code checks each item in turn. If any check fails,
then the function returns failure. If all items succeed, then the function returns success.
For example, if you have a production of the form T → R abc S you could implement this
in assembly language as
T                   proc       near
                    push       di                           ;If we fail, must preserve
di.
                    call       R
                    jnc        Failure
                    call       MatchPrefix
                    byte       “abc”,0
                    jnc        Failure
                    call       S
                    jnc        Failure
                    add        sp, 2                        ;Don’t preserve di if we
succeed.
                    stc
                    ret

Failure:            pop         di
                    clc
                    ret
T                   endp

Note how this code preserves di if it fails, but does not preserve di if it succeeds.
    If you have multiple productions with the same left hand side (i.e., alternation), then
writing an appropriate matching function for the productions is only slightly more com-
plex than the single production case. If you have multiple productions associated with a
single nonterminal on the left hand side, then create a sequence of code to match each of
the individual productions. To combine them into a single matching function, simply
write the function so that it succeeds if any one of these code sequences succeeds. If one of
the productions is of the form T → e, then test the other conditions first. If none of them
could be selected, the function succeeds. For example, consider the productions:

                          E’ → + factor E’ |      - factor E’ |     ε
This translates to the following assembly code:


                                                                                        Page 907
Chapter 16

             EPrime          proc          near
                             push          di
                             cmp           byte ptr es:[di], ‘+’
                             jne           TryMinus
                             inc           di
                             call          factor
                             jnc           EP_Failed
                             call          EPrime
                             jnc           EP_Failed
             Success:        add           sp, 2
                             stc
                             ret

             TryMinus:       cmp           byte ptr es:[di], ‘-’
                             jne           EP_Failed
                             inc           di
                             call          factor
                             jnc           EP_Failed
                             call          EPrime
                             jnc           EP_Failed
                             add           sp, 2
                             stc
                             ret

             EP_Failed:      pop           di
                             stc                           ;Succeed because of E’ ->     ε
                             ret
             EPrime          endp


             This routine always succeeds because it has the production E’ → ε. This is why the stc
             instruction appears after the EP_Failed label.
                  To invoke a pattern matching function, simply load es:di with the address of the string
             you want to test and call the pattern matching function. On return, the carry flag will con-
             tain one if the pattern matches the string up to the point returned in di. If you want to see
             if the entire string matches the pattern, simply check to see if es:di is pointing at a zero
             byte when you get back from the function call. If you want to see if a string belongs to a
             context free language, you should call the function associated with the starting symbol for
             the given context free grammar.
                The following program implements the arithmetic grammar we’ve been using as
             examples throughout the past several sections. The complete implementation is
             ; ARITH.ASM
             ;
             ; A simple recursive descent parser for arithmetic strings.

                                 .xlist
                                 include stdlib.a
                                 includelibstdlib.lib
                                 .list


             dseg                segment    para public ‘data’

             ;   Grammar for simple arithmetic grammar (supports +, -, *, /):
             ;
             ;   E -> FE’
             ;   E’ -> + F E’ | - F E’ | <empty string>
             ;   F -> TF’
             ;   F’ -> * T F’ | / T F’ | <empty string>
             ;   T -> G | (E)
             ;   G -> H | H G
             ;   H -> 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
             ;


             InputLine           byte       128 dup (0)

             dseg                ends

Page 908
                                                                  Control Structures


cseg                segment   para public ‘code’
                    assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

;   Matching functions for the grammar.
;   These functions return the carry flag set if they match their
;   respective item. They return the carry flag clear if they fail.
;   If they fail, they preserve di. If they succeed, di points to
;   the first character after the match.


; E -> FE’

E                   proc      near
                    push      di
                    call      F           ;See if F, then E’, succeeds.
                    jnc       E_Failed
                    call      EPrime
                    jnc       E_Failed
                    add       sp, 2       ;Success, don’t restore di.
                    stc
                    ret

E_Failed:           pop       di          ;Failure, must restore di.
                    clc
                    ret
E                   endp



; E’ -> + F E’ | - F E’ |     ε
EPrime              proc      near
                    push      di

; Try + F E’ here

                    cmp       byte ptr es:[di], ‘+’
                    jne       TryMinus
                    inc       di
                    call      F
                    jnc       EP_Failed
                    call      EPrime
                    jnc       EP_Failed
Success:            add       sp, 2
                    stc
                    ret

; Try    - F E’ here.

TryMinus:           cmp       byte ptr es:[di], ‘-’
                    jne       Success
                    inc       di
                    call      F
                    jnc       EP_Failed
                    call      EPrime
                    jnc       EP_Failed
                    add       sp, 2
                    stc
                    ret

; If none of the above succeed, return success anyway because we have
; a production of the form E’ -> ε.

EP_Failed:          pop       di
                    stc
                    ret
EPrime              endp




                                                                          Page 909
Chapter 16


             ; F -> TF’

             F                proc          near
                              push          di
                              call          T
                              jnc           F_Failed
                              call          FPrime
                              jnc           F_Failed
                              add           sp, 2       ;Success, don’t restore di.
                              stc
                              ret

             F_Failed:        pop           di
                              clc
                              ret
             F                endp




             ; F -> * T F’ | / T F’ |   ε
             FPrime           proc          near
                              push          di
                              cmp           byte ptr es:[di], ‘*’        ;Start with “*”?
                              jne           TryDiv
                              inc           di                           ;Skip the “*”.
                              call          T
                              jnc           FP_Failed
                              call          FPrime
                              jnc           FP_Failed
             Success:         add           sp, 2
                              stc
                              ret

             ; Try F -> / T F’ here

             TryDiv:          cmp           byte ptr es:[di], ‘/’        ;Start with “/”?
                              jne           Success                      ;Succeed anyway.
                              inc           di                           ;Skip the “/”.
                              call          T
                              jnc           FP_Failed
                              call          FPrime
                              jnc           FP_Failed
                              add           sp, 2
                              stc
                              ret

             ; If the above both fail, return success anyway because we’ve got
             ; a production of the form F -> ε

             FP_Failed:       pop           di
                              stc
                              ret
             FPrime           endp


             ; T -> G | (E)

             T                proc          near

             ; Try T -> G here.

                              call          G
                              jnc           TryParens
                              ret

             ; Try T -> (E) here.



Page 910
                                                                   Control Structures

TryParens:         push     di                             ;Preserve if we fail.
                   cmp      byte ptr es:[di], ‘(‘          ;Start with “(“?
                   jne      T_Failed                       ;Fail if no.
                   inc      di                             ;Skip “(“ char.
                   call     E
                   jnc      T_Failed
                   cmp      byte ptr es:[di], ‘)’          ;End with “)”?
                   jne      T_Failed                       ;Fail if no.
                   inc      di                             ;Skip “)”
                   add      sp, 2                          ;Don’t restore di,
                   stc                                     ; we’ve succeeded.
                   ret

T_Failed:          pop      di
                   clc
                   ret
T                  endp


;   The following is a free-form translation of
;
;   G -> H | H G
;   H -> 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
;
;   This routine checks to see if there is at least one digit. It fails if there
;   isn’t at least one digit; it succeeds and skips over all digits if there are
;   one or more digits.

G                  proc     near
                   cmp      byte ptr es:[di], ‘0’          ;Check for at least
                   jb       G_Failed                       ; one digit.
                   cmp      byte ptr es:[di], ‘9’
                   ja       G_Failed

DigitLoop:         inc      di                             ;Skip any remaining
                   cmp      byte ptr es:[di], ‘0’          ; digits found.
                   jb       G_Succeeds
                   cmp      byte ptr es:[di], ‘9’
                   jbe      DigitLoop
G_Succeeds:        stc
                   ret

G_Failed:          clc                                     ;Fail if no digits
                   ret                                     ; at all.
G                  endp


; This main program tests the matching functions above and demonstrates
; how to call the matching functions.

Main               proc
                   mov      ax, seg dseg ;Set up the segment registers
                   mov      ds, ax
                   mov      es, ax

                   printf
                   byte     “Enter an arithmetic expression: “,0
                   lesi     InputLine
                   gets
                   call     E
                   jnc      BadExp

; Good so far, but are we at the end of the string?

                   cmp      byte ptr es:[di], 0
                   jne      BadExp

; Okay, it truly is a good expression at this point.

                   printf


                                                                           Page 911
Chapter 16

                                       byte       “‘%s’ is a valid expression”,cr,lf,0
                                       dword      InputLine
                                       jmp        Quit

                 BadExp:               printf
                                       byte       “‘%s’ is an invalid arithmetic expression”,cr,lf,0
                                       dword      InputLine

                 Quit:                 ExitPgm
                 Main                  endp

                 cseg                  ends

                 sseg                  segment    para stack ‘stack’
                 stk                   byte       1024 dup (“stack “)
                 sseg                  ends

                 zzzzzzseg             segment     para public ‘zzzzzz’
                 LastBytes             byte        16 dup (?)
                 zzzzzzseg             ends
                                       end        Main




16.1.7       Some Final Comments on CFGs
                      The techniques presented in this chapter for converting CFGs to assembly code do not
                 work for all CFGs. They only work for a (large) subset of the CFGs known as LL(1) gram-
                 mars. The code that these techniques produce is a recursive descent predictive parser6.
                 Although the set of context free languages recognizable by an LL(1) grammar is a subset
                 of the context free languages, it is a very large subset and you shouldn’t run into too many
                 difficulties using this technique.
                      One important feature of predictive parsers is that they do not require any backtrack-
                 ing. If you are willing to live with the inefficiencies associated with backtracking, it is easy
                 to extended a recursive descent parser to handle any CFG. Note that when you use back-
                 tracking, the predictive adjective goes away, you wind up with a nondeterministic system
                 rather than a deterministic system (predictive and deterministic are very close in meaning
                 in this case).
                     There are other CFG systems as well as LL(1). The so-called operator precedence and
                 LR(k) CFGs are two examples. For more information about parsing and grammars, con-
                 sult a good text on formal language theory or compiler construction (see the bibliogra-
                 phy).



16.1.8       Beyond Context Free Languages
                      Although most patterns you will probably want to process will be regular or context
                 free, there may be times when you need to recognize certain types of patterns that are
                 beyond these two (e.g., context sensitive languages). As it turns out, the finite state autom-
                 ata are the simplest machines; the pushdown automata (that recognize context free lan-
                 guages) are the next step up. After pushdown automata, the next step up in power is the
                 Turing machine. However, Turing machines are equivalent in power to the 80x867, so
                 matching patterns recognized by Turing machines is no different than writing a normal
                 program.
                    The key to writing functions that recognize patterns that are not context free is to
                 maintain information in variables and use the variables to decide which of several pro-
                 ductions you want to use at any one given time. This technique introduces context sensitiv-

    6. A parser is a function that determines whether a pattern belongs to a language.
    7. Actually, they are more powerful, in theory, because they have an infinite amount of memory available.


Page 912
                                                                                         Control Structures

            ity. Such techniques are very useful in artificial intelligence programs (like natural
            language processing) where ambiguity resolution depends on past knowledge or the cur-
            rent context of a pattern matching operation. However, the uses for such types of pattern
            matching quickly go beyond the scope of a text on assembly language programming, so
            we will let some other text continue this discussion.



16.2   The UCR Standard Library Pattern Matching Routines
                The UCR Standard Library provides a very sophisticated set of pattern matching rou-
            tines. They are patterned after the pattern matching facilities of SNOBOL4, support CFGs,
            and provide fully automatic backtracking, as necessary. Furthermore, by writing only five
            assembly language statements, you can match simple or complex patterns.
                There is very little assembly language code to worry about when using the Standard
            Library’s pattern matching routines because most of the work occurs in the data segment.
            To use the pattern matching routines, you first construct a pattern data structure in the
            data segment. You then pass the address of this pattern and the string you wish to test to
            the Standard Library match routine. The match routine returns failure or success depend-
            ing on the state of the comparison. This isn’t quite as easy as it sounds, though; learning
            how to construct the pattern data structure is almost like learning a new programming
            language. Fortunately, if you’ve followed the discussion on context free languages, learn-
            ing this new “language” is a breeze.
                The Standard Library pattern data structure takes the following form:
            Pattern             struct
            MatchFunction       dword      ?
            MatchParm           dword      ?
            MatchAlt            dword      ?
            NextPattern         dword      ?
            EndPattern          word       ?
            StartPattern        word       ?
            StrSeg              word       ?
            Pattern             ends

                The MatchFunction field contains the address of a routine to call to perform some sort
            of comparison. The success or failure of this function determines whether the pattern
            matches the input string. For example, the UCR Standard Library provides a MatchStr
            function that compares the next n characters of the input string against some other char-
            acter string.
                The MatchParm field contains the address or value of a parameter (if appropriate) for
            the MatchFunction routine. For example, if the MatchFunction routine is MatchStr, then the
            MatchParm field contains the address of the string to compare the input characters against.
            Likewise, the MatchChar routine compares the next input character in the string against the
            L.O. byte of the MatchParm field. Some matching functions do not require any parameters,
            they will ignore any value you assign to MatchParm field. By convention, most program-
            mers store a zero in unused fields of the Pattern structure.
                The MatchAlt field contains either zero (NULL) or the address of some other pattern
            data structure. If the current pattern matches the input characters, the pattern matching
            routines ignore this field. However, if the current pattern fails to match the input string,
            then the pattern matching routines will attempt to match the pattern whose address
            appears in this field. If this alternate pattern returns success, then the pattern matching
            routine returns success to the caller, otherwise it returns failure. If the MatchAlt field con-
            tains NULL, then the pattern matching routine immediately fails if the main pattern does
            not match.
                 The Pattern data structure only matches one item. For example, it might match a single
            character, a single string, or a character from a set of characters. A real world pattern will
            probably contain several small patterns concatenated together, e.g., the pattern for a Pas-
            cal identifier consists of a single character from the set of alphabetic characters followed


                                                                                                  Page 913
Chapter 16

                by one or more characters from the set [a-zA-Z0-9_]. The NextPattern field lets you create a
                composite pattern as the concatenation of two individual patterns. For such a composite
                pattern to return success, the current pattern must match and then the pattern specified by
                the NextPattern field must also match. Note that you can chain as many patterns together
                as you please using this field.
                    The last three fields, EndPattern, StartPattern, and StrSeg are for the internal use of the
                pattern matching routine. You should not modify or examine these fields.
                    Once you create a pattern, it is very easy to test a string to see if it matches that pat-
                tern. The calling sequence for the UCR Standard Library match routine is
                                    lesi        « Input string to match »
                                    ldxi        « Pattern to match string against »
                                    mov         cx, 0
                                    match
                                    jc          Success

                     The Standard Library match routine expects a pointer to the input string in the es:di
                registers; it expects a pointer to the pattern you want to match in the dx:si register pair. The
                cx register should contain the length of the string you want to test. If cx contains zero, the
                match routine will test the entire input string. If cx contains a nonzero value, the match
                routine will only test the first cx characters in the string. Note that the end of the string
                (the zero terminating byte) must not appear in the string before the position specified in
                cx. For most applications, loading cx with zero before calling match is the most appropri-
                ate operation.
                    On return from the match routine, the carry flag denotes success or failure. If the carry
                flag is set, the pattern matches the string; if the carry flag is clear, the pattern does not
                match the string. Unlike the examples given in earlier sections, the match routine does not
                modify the di register, even if the match succeeds. Instead, it returns the failure/success
                position in the ax register. The is the position of the first character after the match if match
                succeeds, it is the position of the first unmatched character if match fails.



16.3     The Standard Library Pattern Matching Functions
                     The UCR Standard Library provides about 20 built-in pattern matching functions.
                These functions are based on the pattern matching facilities provided by the SNOBOL4
                programming language, so they are very powerful indeed! You will probably discover
                that these routines solve all your pattern matching need, although it is easy to write your
                own pattern matching routines (see “Designing Your Own Pattern Matching Routines” on
                page 922) if an appropriate one is not available. The following subsections describe each
                of these pattern matching routines in detail.
                     There are two things you should note if you’re using the Standard Library’s
                SHELL.ASM file when creating programs that use pattern matching and character sets.
                First, there is a line at the very beginning of the SHELL.ASM file that contains the state-
                ment “matchfuncs”. This line is currently a comment because it contains a semicolon in
                column one. If you are going to be using the pattern matching facilities of the UCR Stan-
                dard Library, you need to uncomment this line by deleting the semicolon in column one. If
                you are going to be using the character set facilities of the UCR Standard Library (very
                common when using the pattern matching facilities), you may want to uncomment the
                line containing “include stdsets.a” in the data segment. The “stdsets.a” file includes sev-
                eral common character sets, including alphabetics, digits, alphanumerics, whitespace, and
                so on.



16.3.1       Spancset
                    The spancset routine skips over all characters belonging to a character set. This routine
                will match zero or more characters in the specified set and, therefore, always succeeds.

Page 914
                                                                                          Control Structures

            The MatchParm field of the pattern data structure must point at a UCR Standard Library
            character set variable (see “The Character Set Routines in the UCR Standard Library” on
            page 856).
            Example:
            SkipAlphas          pattern     {spancset, alpha}
                                  .
                                  .
                                  .
                                lesi        StringWAlphas
                                ldxi        SkipAlphas
                                xor         cx, cx
                                match



16.3.2   Brkcset
                 Brkcset is the dual to spancset – it matches zero or more characters in the input string
            which are not members of a specified character set. Another way of viewing brkcset is that
            it will match all characters in the input string up to a character in the specified character
            set (or to the end of the string). The matchparm field contains the address of the character
            set to match.
            Example:
            DoDigits            pattern     {brkcset, digits, 0, DoDigits2}
            DoDigits2           pattern     {spancset, digits}
                                  .
                                  .
                                  .
                                lesi        StringWDigits
                                ldxi        DoDigits
                                xor         cx, cx
                                match
                                jnc         NoDigits

            The code above matches any string that contains a string of one or more digits somewhere
            in the string.



16.3.3   Anycset
                Anycset matches a single character in the input string from a set of characters. The
            matchparm field contains the address of a character set variable. If the next character in the
            input string is a member of this set, anycset set accepts the string and skips over than char-
            acter. If the next input character is not a member of that set, anycset returns failure.
            Example:
            DoID                pattern     {anycset, alpha, 0, DoID2}
            DoID2               pattern     {spancset, alphanum}
                                  .
                                  .
                                  .
                                lesi        StringWID
                                ldxi        DoID
                                xor         cx, cx
                                match
                                jnc         NoID

            This code segment checks the string StringWID to see if it begins with an identifier specified
            by the regular expression [a-zA-Z][a-zA-Z0-9]*. The first subpattern with anycset makes
            sure there is an alphabetic character at the beginning of the string (alpha is the stdsets.a set
            variable that has all the alphabetic characters as members). If the string does not begin
            with an alphabetic, the DoID pattern fails. The second subpattern, DoID2, skips over any
            following alphanumeric characters using the spancset matching function. Note that
            spancset always succeeds.




                                                                                                  Page 915
Chapter 16

                    The above code does not simply match a string that is an identifier; it matches strings
                that begin with a valid identifier. For example, it would match “ThisIsAnID” as well as
                “ThisIsAnID+SoIsThis - 5”. If you only want to match a single identifier and nothing else,
                you must explicitly check for the end of string in your pattern. For more details on how to
                do this, see “EOS” on page 919.



16.3.4       Notanycset
                     Notanycset provides the complement to anycset – it matches a single character in the
                input string that is not a member of a character set. The matchparm field, as usual, contains
                the address of the character set whose members must not appear as the next character in
                the input string. If notanycset successfully matches a character (that is, the next input char-
                acter is not in the designated character set), the function skips the character and returns
                success; otherwise it returns failure.
                Example:
                DoSpecial            pattern     {notanycset, digits, 0, DoSpecial2}
                DoSpecial2           pattern     {spancset, alphanum}
                                       .
                                       .
                                       .
                                     lesi        StringWSpecial
                                     ldxi        DoSpecial
                                     xor         cx, cx
                                     match
                                     jnc         NoSpecial

                     This code is similar to the DoID pattern in the previous example. It matches a string
                containing any character except a digit and then matches a string of alphanumeric charac-
                ters.



16.3.5       MatchStr
                    Matchstr compares the next set of input characters against a character string. The
                matchparm field contains the address of a zero terminated string to compare against. If
                matchstr succeeds, it returns the carry set and skips over the characters it matched; if it
                fails, it tries the alternate matching function or returns failure if there is no alternate.
                Example:
                DoString             pattern     {matchstr, MyStr}
                MyStr                byte        “Match this!”,0
                                       .
                                       .
                                       .
                                     lesi        String
                                     ldxi        DoString
                                     xor         cx, cx
                                     match
                                     jnc         NotMatchThis

                This sample code matches any string that begins with the characters “Match This!”



16.3.6       MatchiStr
                    Matchistr is like matchstr insofar as it compares the next several characters against a
                zero terminated string value. However, matchistr does a case insensitive comparison. Dur-
                ing the comparison it converts the characters in the input string to upper case before com-
                paring them to the characters that the matchparm field points at. Therefore, the string
                pointed at by the matchparm field must contain uppercase wherever alphabetics appear. If the
                matchparm string contains any lower case characters, the matchistr function will always fail.


Page 916
                                                                                         Control Structures

            Example:
            DoString            pattern    {matchistr, MyStr}
            MyStr               byte       “MATCH THIS!”,0
                                  .
                                  .
                                  .
                                lesi       String
                                ldxi       DoString
                                xor        cx, cx
                                match
                                jnc        NotMatchThis

            This example is identical to the one in the previous section except it will match the charac-
            ters “match this!” using any combination of upper and lower case characters.



16.3.7   MatchToStr
                Matchtostr matches all characters in an input string up to and including the characters
            specified by the matchparm parameter. This routine succeeds if the specified string appears
            somewhere in the input string, it fails if the string does not appear in the input string. This
            pattern function is quite useful for locating a substring and ignoring everything that came
            before the substring.
            Example:
            DoString            pattern    {matchtostr, MyStr}
            MyStr               byte       “Match this!”,0
                                  .
                                  .
                                  .
                                lesi       String
                                ldxi       DoString
                                xor        cx, cx
                                match
                                jnc        NotMatchThis

            Like the previous two examples, this code segment matches the string “Match this!” How-
            ever, it does not require that the input string (String) begin with “Match this!” Instead, it
            only requires that “Match this!” appear somewhere in the string.



16.3.8   MatchChar
                The matchchar function matches a single character. The matchparm field’s L.O. byte
            contains the character you want to match. If the next character in the input string is that
            character, then this function succeeds, otherwise it fails.
            Example:
            DoSpace             pattern    {matchchar, ‘ ‘}
                                  .
                                  .
                                  .
                                lesi       String
                                ldxi       DoSpace
                                xor        cx, cx
                                match
                                jnc        NoSpace

            This code segment matches any string that begins with a space. Keep in mind that the
            match routine only checks the prefix of a string. If you wanted to see if the string contained
            only a space (rather than a string that begins with a space), you would need to explicitly
            check for an end of string after the space. Of course, it would be far more efficient to use
            strcmp (see “Strcmp, Strcmpl, Stricmp, Stricmpl” on page 848) rather than match for this
            purpose!




                                                                                                  Page 917
Chapter 16

                    Note that unlike matchstr, you encode the character you want to match directly into
                the matchparm field. This lets you specify the character you want to test directly in the pat-
                tern definition.



16.3.9       MatchToChar
                     Like matchtostr, matchtochar matches all characters up to and including a character you
                specify. This is similar to brkcset except you don’t have to create a character set containing
                a single member and brkcset skips up to but not including the specified character(s). Match-
                tochar fails if it cannot find the specified character in the input string.
                Example:
                DoToSpace            pattern     {matchtochar, ‘ ‘}
                                       .
                                       .
                                       .
                                     lesi        String
                                     ldxi        DoSpace
                                     xor         cx, cx
                                     match
                                     jnc         NoSpace

                This call to match will fail if there are no spaces left in the input string. If there are, the call
                to matchtochar will skip over all characters up to, and including, the first space. This is a
                useful pattern for skipping over words in a string.



16.3.10 MatchChars
                    Matchchars skips zero or more occurrences of a singe character in an input string. It is
                similar to spancset except you can specify a single character rather than an entire character
                set with a single member. Like matchchar, matchchars expects a single character in the L.O.
                byte of the matchparm field. Since this routine matches zero or more occurrences of that
                character, it always succeeds.
                Example:
                Skip2NextWord        pattern     {matchtochar, ‘ ‘, 0, SkipSpcs}
                SkipSpcs             pattern     {matchchars, ‘ ‘}
                                       .
                                       .
                                       .
                                     lesi        String
                                     ldxi        Skip2NextWord
                                     xor         cx, cx
                                     match
                                     jnc         NoWord

                The code segment skips to the beginning of the next word in a string. It fails if there are no
                additional words in the string (i.e., the string contains no spaces).



16.3.11 MatchToPat
                     Matchtopat matches all characters in a string up to and including the substring
                matched by some other pattern. This is one of the two facilities the UCR Standard Library
                pattern matching routines provide to allow the implementation of nonterminal function
                calls (also see “SL_Match2” on page 922). This matching function succeeds if it finds a
                string matching the specified pattern somewhere on the line. If it succeeds, it skips the
                characters through the last character matched by the pattern parameter. As you would
                expect, the matchparm field contains the address of the pattern to match.
                Example:



Page 918
                                                                                                  Control Structures

               ; Assume there is a pattern “expression” that matches arithmetic
               ; expressions. The following pattern determines if there is such an
               ; expression on the line followed by a semicolon.

               FindExp               pattern     {matchtopat, expression, 0, MatchSemi}
               MatchSemi             pattern     {matchchar, ‘;‘}
                                       .
                                       .
                                       .
                                     lesi        String
                                     ldxi        FindExp
                                     xor         cx, cx
                                     match
                                     jnc         NoExp




16.3.12 EOS
                   The EOS pattern matches the end of a string. This pattern, which must obviously
               appear at the end of a pattern list if it appears at all, checks for the zero terminating byte.
               Since the Standard Library routines only match prefixes, you should stick this pattern at
               the end of a list if you want to ensure that a pattern exactly matches a string with no left
               over characters at the end. EOS succeeds if it matches the zero terminating byte, it fails
               otherwise.
               Example:
               SkipNumber            pattern     {anycset, digits, 0, SkipDigits}
               SkipDigits            pattern     {spancset, digits, 0, EOSPat}
               EOSPat                pattern     {EOS}
                                       .
                                       .
                                       .
                                     lesi        String
                                     ldxi        SkipNumber
                                     xor         cx, cx
                                     match
                                     jnc         NoNumber

               The SkipNumber pattern matches strings that contain only decimal digits (from the start of
               the match to the end of the string). Note that EOS requires no parameters, not even a
               matchparm parameter.



16.3.13 ARB
                    ARB matches any number of arbitrary characters. This pattern matching function is
               equivalent to Σ*. Note that ARB is a very inefficient routine to use. It works by assuming it
               can match all remaining characters in the string and then tries to match the pattern speci-
               fied by the nextpattern field8. If the nextpattern item fails, ARB backs up one character and
               tries matching nextpattern again. This continues until the pattern specified by nextpattern
               succeeds or ARB backs up to its initial starting position. ARB succeeds if the pattern speci-
               fied by nextpattern succeeds, it fails if it backs up to its initial starting position.
                   Given the enormous amount of backtracking that can occur with ARB (especially on
               long strings), you should try to avoid using this pattern if at all possible. The matchtostr,
               matchtochar, and matchtopat functions accomplish much of what ARB accomplishes, but
               they work forward rather than backward in the source string and may be more efficient.
               ARB is useful mainly if you’re sure the following pattern appears late in the string you’re
               matching or if the string you want to match occurs several times and you want to match
               the last occurrence (matchtostr, matchtochar, and matchtopat always match the first occur-
               rence they find).

  8. Since the match routine only matches prefixes, it does not make sense to apply ARB to the end of a pattern list,
  the same pattern would match with or without the final ARB. Therefore, ARB usually has a nextpattern field.


                                                                                                           Page 919
Chapter 16

             Example:
             SkipNumber           pattern     {ARB,0,0,SkipDigit}
             SkipDigit            pattern     {anycset, digits, 0, SkipDigits}
             SkipDigits           pattern     {spancset, digits}
                                    .
                                    .
                                    .
                                  lesi        String
                                  ldxi        SkipNumber
                                  xor         cx, cx
                                  match
                                  jnc         NoNumber

             This code example matches the last number that appears on an input line. Note that ARB
             does not use the matchparm field, so you should set it to zero by default.



16.3.14 ARBNUM
                 ARBNUM matches an arbitrary number (zero or more) of patterns that occur in the
             input string. If R represents some nonterminal number (pattern matching function), then
             ARBNUM(R ) is equivalent to the production ARBNUM → R ARBNUM | ε.
                The matchparm field contains the address of the pattern that ARBNUM attempts to
             match.
             Example:
             SkipNumbers          pattern     {ARBNUM, SkipNumber}
             SkipNumber           pattern     {anycset, digits, 0, SkipDigits}
             SkipDigits           pattern     {spancset, digits, 0, EndDigits}
             EndDigits            pattern     {matchchars, ‘ ‘, EndString}
             EndString            pattern     {EOS}
                                    .
                                    .
                                    .
                                  lesi        String
                                  ldxi        SkipNumbers
                                  xor         cx, cx
                                  match
                                  jnc         IllegalNumbers

             This code accepts the input string if it consists of a sequence of zero or more numbers sep-
             arated by spaces and terminated with the EOS pattern. Note the use of the matchalt field in
             the EndDigits pattern to select EOS rather than a space for the last number in the string.



16.3.15 Skip
                 Skip matches n arbitrary characters in the input string. The matchparm field is an inte-
             ger value containing the number of characters to skip. Although the matchparm field is a
             double word, this routine limits the number of characters you can skip to 16 bits (65,535
             characters); that is, n is the L.O. word of the matchparm field. This should prove sufficient
             for most needs.
                Skip succeeds if there are at least n characters left in the input string; it fails if there are
             fewer than n characters left in the input string.
             Example:
             Skip1st6             pattern     {skip, 6, 0, SkipNumber}
             SkipNumber           pattern     {anycset, digits, 0, SkipDigits}
             SkipDigits           pattern     {spancset, digits, 0, EndDigits}
             EndDigits            pattern     {EOS}
                                    .
                                    .
                                    .
                                  lesi        String
                                  ldxi        Skip1st6
                                  xor         cx, cx

Page 920
                                                                                      Control Structures

                              match
                              jnc        IllegalItem

          This example matches a string containing six arbitrary characters followed by one or more
          decimal digits and a zero terminating byte.



16.3.16 Pos
             Pos succeeds if the matching functions are currently at the nth character in the string,
          where n is the value in the L.O. word of the matchparm field. Pos fails if the matching func-
          tions are not currently at position n in the string. Unlike the pattern matching functions
          you’ve seen so far, pos does not consume any input characters. Note that the string starts
          out at position zero. So when you use the pos function, it succeeds if you’ve matched n
          characters at that point.
          Example:
          SkipNumber          pattern    {anycset, digits, 0, SkipDigits}
          SkipDigits          pattern    {spancset, digits, 0, EndDigits}
          EndDigits           pattern    {pos, 4}
                                .
                                .
                                .
                              lesi       String
                              ldxi       SkipNumber
                              xor        cx, cx
                              match
                              jnc        IllegalItem

          This code matches a string that begins with exactly 4 decimal digits.



16.3.17 RPos
              Rpos works quite a bit like the pos function except it succeeds if the current position is
          n character positions from the end of the string. Like pos, n is the L.O. 16 bits of the
          matchparm field. Also like pos, rpos does not consume any input characters.
          Example:
          SkipNumber          pattern    {anycset, digits, 0, SkipDigits}
          SkipDigits          pattern    {spancset, digits, 0, EndDigits}
          EndDigits           pattern    {rpos, 4}
                                .
                                .
                                .
                              lesi       String
                              ldxi       SkipNumber
                              xor        cx, cx
                              match
                              jnc        IllegalItem

          This code matches any string that is all decimal digits except for the last four characters of
          the string. The string must be at least five characters long for the above pattern match to
          succeed.



16.3.18 GotoPos
              Gotopos skips over any characters in the string until it reaches character position n in
          the string. This function fails if the pattern is already beyond position n in the string. The
          L.O. word of the matchparm field contains the value for n.
          Example:
          SkipNumber          pattern    {gotopos, 10, 0, MatchNmbr}
          MatchNmbr           pattern    {anycset, digits, 0, SkipDigits}

                                                                                               Page 921
Chapter 16

             SkipDigits           pattern     {spancset, digits, 0, EndDigits}
             EndDigits            pattern     {rpos, 4}
                                    .
                                    .
                                    .
                                  lesi        String
                                  ldxi        SkipNumber
                                  xor         cx, cx
                                  match
                                  jnc         IllegalItem

             This example code skips to position 10 in the string and attempts to match a string of dig-
             its starting with the 11th character. This pattern succeeds if the there are four characters
             remaining in the string after processing all the digits.



16.3.19 RGotoPos
                  Rgotopos works like gotopos except it goes to the position specified from the end of the
             string. Rgotopos fails if the matching routines are already beyond position n from the end
             of the string. As with gotopos, the L.O. word of the matchparm field contains the value for n.
             Example:
             SkipNumber           pattern     {rgotopos, 10, 0, MatchNmbr}
             MatchNmbr            pattern     {anycset, digits, 0, SkipDigits}
             SkipDigits           pattern     {spancset, digits}
                                    .
                                    .
                                    .
                                  lesi        String
                                  ldxi        SkipNumber
                                  xor         cx, cx
                                  match
                                  jnc         IllegalItem

             This example skips to ten characters from the end of the string and then attempts to match
             one or digits starting at that point. It fails if there aren’t at least 11 characters in the string
             or the last 10 characters don’t begin with a string of one or more digits.



16.3.20 SL_Match2
                  The sl_match2 routine is nothing more than a recursive call to match. The matchparm
             field contains the address of pattern to match. This is quite useful for simulating parenthe-
             sis around a pattern in a pattern expression. As far as matching strings are concerned,
             pattern1 and pattern2, below, are equivalent:
             Pattern2             pattern     {sl_match2, Pattern1}
             Pattern1             pattern     {matchchar, ‘a’}

             The only difference between invoking a pattern directly and invoking it with sl_match2 is
             that sl_match2 tweaks some internal variables to keep track of matching positions within
             the input string. Later, you can extract the character string matched by sl_match2 using the
             patgrab routine (see “Extracting Substrings from Matched Patterns” on page 925).



16.4    Designing Your Own Pattern Matching Routines
                 Although the UCR Standard Library provides a wide variety of matching functions,
             there is no way to anticipate the needs of all applications. Therefore, you will probably
             discover that the library does not support some particular pattern matching function you
             need. Fortunately, it is very easy for you to create your own pattern matching functions to
             augment those available in the UCR Standard Library. When you specify a matching func-



Page 922
                                                                            Control Structures

tion name in the pattern data structure, the match routine calls the specified address using
a far call and passing the following parameters:
es:di-    Points at the next character in the input string. You should not look at any charac-
          ters before this address. Furthermore, you should never look beyond the end of
          the string (see cx below).
ds:si-    Contains the four byte parameter found in the matchparm field.
cx-       Contains the last position, plus one, in the input string you’re allowed to look at.
          Note that your pattern matching routine should not look beyond location es:cx or
          the zero terminating byte; whichever comes first in the input string.
     On return from the function, ax must contain the offset into the string (di’s value) of
the last character matched plus one, if your matching function is successful. It must also set
the carry flag to denote success. After your pattern matches, the match routine might call
another matching function (the one specified by the next pattern field) and that function
begins matching at location es:ax.
    If the pattern match fails, then you must return the original di value in the ax register
and return with the carry flag clear. Note that your matching function must preserve all
other registers.
     There is one very important detail you must never forget with writing your own pat-
tern matching routines – ds does not point at your data segment, it contains the H.O. word
of the matchparm parameter. Therefore, if you are going to access global variables in your
data segment you will need to push ds, load it with the address of dseg, and pop ds before
leaving. Several examples throughout this chapter demonstrate how to do this.
    There are some obvious omissions from (the current version of) the UCR Standard
Library’s repertoire. For example, there should probably be matchtoistr, matchichar, and
matchtoichar pattern functions. The following example code demonstrates how to add a
matchtoistr (match up to a string, doing a case insensitive comparison) routine.
                     .xlist

                     include    stdlib.a
                     includelib stdlib.lib
                     matchfuncs
                     .list

dseg                 segment    para public ‘data’

TestString           byte       “This is the string ‘xyz’ in it”,cr,lf,0

TestPat              pattern    {matchtoistr,xyz}
xyz                  byte       “XYZ”,0

dseg                 ends


cseg                 segment    para public ‘code’
                     assume     cs:cseg, ds:dseg

; MatchToiStr-       Matches all characters in a string up to, and including, the
;                    specified parameter string. The parameter string must be
;                    all upper case characters. This guy matches string using
;                    a case insensitive comparison.
;
; inputs:
;                    es:di-     Source string
;                    ds:si-     String to match
;                    cx-        Maximum match position
;
; outputs:
;                    ax-        Points at first character beyond the end of the
;                               matched string if success, contains the initial DI
;                               value if failure occurs.
;                    carry-     0 if failure, 1 if success.

                                                                                     Page 923
Chapter 16


             MatchToiStr      proc     far
                              pushf
                              push     di
                              push     si
                              cld

             ; Check to see if we’re already past the point were we’re allowed
             ; to scan in the input string.

                              cmp      di, cx
                              jae      MTiSFailure

             ; If the pattern string is the empty string, always match.

                              cmp      byte ptr ds:[si], 0
                              je       MTSsuccess

             ; The following loop scans through the input string looking for
             ; the first character in the pattern string.

             ScanLoop:        push     si
                              lodsb                  ;Get first char of string

                              dec      di
             FindFirst:       inc      di            ;Move on to next (or 1st) char.
                              cmp      di, cx        ;If at cx, then we’ve got to
                              jae CantFind1st; fail.

                              mov      ah, es:[di]   ;Get input character.
                              cmp      ah, ‘a’       ;Convert input character to
                              jb       DoCmp         ; upper case if it’s a lower
                              cmp      ah, ‘z’       ; case character.
                              ja       DoCmp
                              and      ah, 5fh
             DoCmp:           cmp      al, ah        ;Compare input character against
                              jne      FindFirst     ; pattern string.


             ; At this point, we’ve located the first character in the input string
             ; that matches the first character of the pattern string. See if the
             ; strings are equal.

                              push     di            ;Save restart point.

             CmpLoop:         cmp      di, cx       ;See if we’ve gone beyond the
                              jae      StrNotThere; last position allowable.
                              lodsb                 ;Get next input character.
                              cmp      al, 0        ;At the end of the parameter
                              je       MTSsuccess2; string? If so, succeed.

                              inc      di
                              mov      ah, es:[di]   ;Get the next input character.
                              cmp      ah, ‘a’       ;Convert input character to
                              jb       DoCmp2        ; upper case if it’s a lower
                              cmp      ah, ‘z’       ; case character.
                              ja       DoCmp2
                              and      ah, 5fh
             DoCmp2:          cmp      al, ah        ;Compare input character against
                              je       CmpLoop
                              pop      di
                              pop      si
                              jmp      ScanLoop

             StrNotThere:     add      sp, 2         ;Remove di from stack.
             CantFind1st:     add      sp, 2         ;Remove si from stack.
             MTiSFailure:     pop      si
                              pop      di
                              mov      ax, di        ;Return failure position in AX.
                              popf


Page 924
                                                                                       Control Structures

                                clc                       ;Return failure.
                                ret

            MTSSuccess2:        add        sp, 2          ;Remove DI value from stack.
            MTSSuccess:         add        sp, 2          ;Remove SI value from stack.
                                mov        ax, di         ;Return next position in AX.
                                pop        si
                                pop        di
                                popf
                                stc                       ;Return success.
                                ret
            MatchToiStr         endp

            Main                proc
                                mov        ax, dseg
                                mov        ds, ax
                                mov        es, ax
                                meminit

                                lesi       TestString
                                ldxi       TestPat
                                xor        cx, cx
                                match
                                jnc        NoMatch
                                print
                                byte       “Matched”,cr,lf,0
                                jmp        Quit

            NoMatch:            print
                                byte       “Did not match”,cr,lf,0

            Quit:               ExitPgm
            Main                endp

            cseg                ends

            sseg                segment    para stack ‘stack’
            stk                 db         1024 dup (“stack “)
            sseg                ends

            zzzzzzseg           segment    para public ‘zzzzzz’
            LastBytes           db         16 dup (?)
            zzzzzzseg           ends
                                end        Main



16.5   Extracting Substrings from Matched Patterns
                 Often, simply determining that a string matches a given pattern is insufficient. You
            may want to perform various operations that depend upon the actual information in that
            string. However, the pattern matching facilities described thus far do not provide a mech-
            anism for testing individual components of the input string. In this section, you will see
            how to extract portions of a pattern for further processing.
                Perhaps an example may help clarify the need to extract portions of a string. Suppose
            you are writing a stock buy/sell program and you want it to process commands described
            by the following regular expression:
            (buy | sell) [0-9]+ shares of (ibm | apple | hp | dec)

            While it is easy to devise a Standard Library pattern that recognizes strings of this form,
            calling the match routine would only tell you that you have a legal buy or sell command. It
            does not tell you if you are to buy or sell, who to buy or sell, or how many shares to buy or
            sell. Of course, you could take the cross product of (buy | sell) with (ibm | apple | hp |
            dec) and generate eight different regular expressions that uniquely determine whether
            you’re buying or selling and whose stock you’re trading, but you can’t process the integer
            values this way (unless you willing to have millions of regular expressions). A better solu-

                                                                                                Page 925
Chapter 16

             tion would be to extract substrings from the legal pattern and process these substrings
             after you verify that you have a legal buy or sell command. For example, you could
             extract buy or sell into one string, the digits into another, and the company name into a
             third. After verifying the syntax of the command, you could process the individual strings
             you’ve extracted. The UCR Standard Library patgrab routine provides this capability for
             you.
                  You normally call patgrab after calling match and verifying that it matches the input
             string. Patgrab expects a single parameter – a pointer to a pattern recently processed by
             match. Patgrab creates a string on the heap consisting of the characters matched by the
             given pattern and returns a pointer to this string in es:di. Note that patgrab only returns a
             string associated with a single pattern data structure, not a chain of pattern data struc-
             tures. Consider the following pattern:
             PatToGrab           pattern     {matchstr, str1, 0, Pat2}
             Pat2                pattern     {matchstr, str2}
             str1                byte        “Hello”,0
             str2                byte        “ there”,0

             Calling match on PatToGrab will match the string “Hello there”. However, if after calling
             match you call patgrab and pass it the address of PatToGrab, patgrab will return a pointer to
             the string “Hello”.
                  Of course, you might want to collect a string that is the concatenation of several
             strings matched within your pattern (i.e., a portion of the pattern list). This is where call-
             ing the sl_match2 pattern matching function comes in handy. Consider the following pat-
             tern:
             Numbers             pattern     {sl_match2, FirstNumber}
             FirstNumber         pattern     {anycset, digits, 0, OtherDigs}
             OtherDigs           pattern     {spancset, digits}

             This pattern matches the same strings as
             Numbers             pattern     {anycset, digits, 0, OtherDigs}
             OtherDigs           pattern     {spancset, digits}

             So why bother with the extra pattern that calls sl_match2? Well, as it turns out the
             sl_match2 matching function lets you create parenthetical patterns. A parenthetical pattern is
             a pattern list that the pattern matching routines (especially patgrab) treat as a single pat-
             tern. Although the match routine will match the same strings regardless of which version
             of Numbers you use, patgrab will produce two entirely different strings depending upon
             your choice of the above patterns. If you use the latter version, patgrab will only return the
             first digit of the number. If you use the former version (with the call to sl_match2), then pat-
             grab returns the entire string matched by sl_match2, and that turns out to be the entire
             string of digits.
                 The following sample program demonstrates how to use parenthetical patterns to
             extract the pertinent information from the stock command presented earlier. It uses paren-
             thetical patterns for the buy/sell command, the number of shares, and the company
             name.
                                 .xlist
                                 include    stdlib.a
                                 includelib stdlib.lib
                                 matchfuncs
                                 .list

             dseg                segment     para public ‘data’

             ; Variables used to hold the number of shares bought/sold, a pointer to
             ; a string containing the buy/sell command, and a pointer to a string
             ; containing the company name.

             Count               word        0
             CmdPtr              dword       ?
             CompPtr             dword       ?


Page 926
                                                                   Control Structures


; Some test strings to try out:

Cmd1             byte      “Buy 25 shares of apple stock”,0
Cmd2             byte      “Sell 50 shares of hp stock”,0
Cmd3             byte      “Buy 123 shares of dec stock”,0
Cmd4             byte      “Sell 15 shares of ibm stock”,0
BadCmd0          byte      “This is not a buy/sell command”,0

; Patterns for the stock buy/sell command:
;
; StkCmd matches buy or sell and creates a parenthetical pattern
; that contains the string “buy” or “sell”.

StkCmd           pattern   {sl_match2, buyPat, 0, skipspcs1}

buyPat           pattern   {matchistr,buystr,sellpat}
buystr           byte      “BUY”,0

sellpat          pattern   {matchistr,sellstr}
sellstr          byte      “SELL”,0

; Skip zero or more white space characters after the buy command.

skipspcs1        pattern   {spancset, whitespace, 0, CountPat}

; CountPat is a parenthetical pattern that matches one or more
; digits.

CountPat         pattern   {sl_match2, Numbers, 0, skipspcs2}
Numbers          pattern   {anycset, digits, 0, RestOfNum}
RestOfNum        pattern   {spancset, digits}

; The following patterns match “ shares of “ allowing any amount
; of white space between the words.

skipspcs2        pattern   {spancset, whitespace, 0, sharesPat}

sharesPat        pattern   {matchistr, sharesStr, 0, skipspcs3}
sharesStr        byte      “SHARES”,0

skipspcs3        pattern   {spancset, whitespace, 0, ofPat}

ofPat            pattern   {matchistr, ofStr, 0, skipspcs4}
ofStr            byte      “OF”,0

skipspcs4        pattern   {spancset, whitespace, 0, CompanyPat}

; The following parenthetical pattern matches a company name.
; The patgrab-available string will contain the corporate name.

CompanyPat       pattern   {sl_match2, ibmpat}

ibmpat           pattern   {matchistr, ibm, applePat}
ibm              byte      “IBM”,0

applePat         pattern   {matchistr, apple, hpPat}
apple            byte      “APPLE”,0

hpPat            pattern   {matchistr, hp, decPat}
hp               byte      “HP”,0

decPat           pattern   {matchistr, decstr}
decstr           byte      “DEC”,0

                 include   stdsets.a
dseg             ends

cseg             segment   para public ‘code’
                 assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg


                                                                           Page 927
Chapter 16


             ; DoBuySell-   This routine processes a stock buy/sell command.
             ;              After matching the command, it grabs the components
             ;              of the command and outputs them as appropriate.
             ;              This routine demonstrates how to use patgrab to
             ;              extract substrings from a pattern string.
             ;
             ;              On entry, es:di must point at the buy/sell command
             ;              you want to process.

             DoBuySell      proc     near
                            ldxi StkCmd
                            xor      cx, cx
                            match
                            jnc      NoMatch

                            lesi      StkCmd
                            patgrab
                            mov       word ptr CmdPtr, di
                            mov       word ptr CmdPtr+2, es

                            lesi      CountPat
                            patgrab
                            atoi                    ;Convert digits to integer
                            mov       Count, ax
                            free                    ;Return storage to heap.

                            lesi      CompanyPat
                            patgrab
                            mov       word ptr CompPtr, di
                            mov       word ptr CompPtr+2, es

                            printf
                            byte      “Stock command: %^s\n”
                            byte      “Number of shares: %d\n”
                            byte      “Company to trade: %^s\n\n”,0
                            dword     CmdPtr, Count, CompPtr

                            les       di, CmdPtr
                            free
                            les       di, CompPtr
                            free
                            ret

             NoMatch:       print
                            byte      “Illegal buy/sell command”,cr,lf,0
                            ret
             DoBuySell      endp


             Main           proc
                            mov       ax, dseg
                            mov       ds, ax
                            mov       es, ax

                            meminit

                            lesi      Cmd1
                            call      DoBuySell
                            lesi      Cmd2
                            call      DoBuySell
                            lesi      Cmd3
                            call      DoBuySell
                            lesi      Cmd4
                            call      DoBuySell
                            lesi      BadCmd0
                            call      DoBuySell

             Quit:          ExitPgm
             Main           endp


Page 928
                                                                                         Control Structures


            cseg                ends

            sseg                segment    para stack ‘stack’
            stk                 db         1024 dup (“stack “)
            sseg                ends

            zzzzzzseg           segment    para public ‘zzzzzz’
            LastBytes           db         16 dup (?)
            zzzzzzseg           ends
                                end        Main


            Sample program output:
            Stock command: Buy
            Number of shares: 25
            Company to trade: apple

            Stock command: Sell
            Number of shares: 50
            Company to trade: hp

            Stock command: Buy
            Number of shares: 123
            Company to trade: dec

            Stock command: Sell
            Number of shares: 15
            Company to trade: ibm

            Illegal buy/sell command



16.6   Semantic Rules and Actions
                Automata theory is mainly concerned with whether or not a string matches a given
            pattern. Like many theoretical sciences, practitioners of automata theory are only con-
            cerned if something is possible, the practical applications are not as important. For real
            programs, however, we would like to perform certain operations if we match a string or
            perform one from a set of operations depending on how we match the string.
                A semantic rule or semantic action is an operation you perform based upon the type of
            pattern you match. This is, it is the piece of code you execute when you are satisfied with
            some pattern matching behavior. For example, the call to patgrab in the previous section is
            an example of a semantic action.
                 Normally, you execute the code associated with a semantic rule after returning from
            the call to match. Certainly when processing regular expressions, there is no need to pro-
            cess a semantic action in the middle of pattern matching operation. However, this isn’t the
            case for a context free grammar. Context free grammars often involve recursion or may
            use the same pattern several times when matching a single string (that is, you may refer-
            ence the same nonterminal several times while matching the pattern). The pattern match-
            ing data structure only maintains pointers (EndPattern, StartPattern, and StrSeg) to the last
            substring matched by a given pattern. Therefore, if you reuse a subpattern while matching
            a string and you need to execute a semantic rule associated with that subpattern, you will
            need to execute that semantic rule in the middle of the pattern matching operation, before
            you reference that subpattern again.
                  It turns out to be very easy to insert semantic rules in the middle of a pattern matching
            operation. All you need to do is write a pattern matching function that always succeeds
            (i.e., it returns with the carry flag clear). Within the body of your pattern matching routine
            you can choose to ignore the string the matching code is testing and perform any other
            actions you desire.



                                                                                                  Page 929
Chapter 16

                 Your semantic action routine, on return, must set the carry flag and it must copy the
             original contents of di into ax. It must preserve all other registers. Your semantic action
             must not call the match routine (call sl_match2 instead). Match does not allow recursion (it
             is not reentrant) and calling match within a semantic action routine will mess up the pat-
             tern match in progress.
                 The following example provides several examples of semantic action routines within
             a program. This program converts arithmetic expressions in infix (algebraic) form to
             reverse polish notation (RPN) form.


             ;   INFIX.ASM
             ;
             ;   A simple program which demonstrates the pattern matching routines in the
             ;   UCR library. This program accepts an arithmetic expression on the command
             ;   line (no interleaving spaces in the expression is allowed, that is, there
             ;   must be only one command line parameter) and converts it from infix notation
             ;   to postfix (rpn) notation.

                                 .xlist
                                 include    stdlib.a
                                 includelib stdlib.lib
                                 matchfuncs
                                 .list


             dseg                segment   para public ‘data’

             ;   Grammar for simple infix -> postfix translation operation
             ;   (the semantic actions are enclosed in braces}:
             ;
             ;   E -> FE’
             ;   E’ -> +F {output ‘+’} E’ | -F {output ‘-’} E’ | <empty string>
             ;   F -> TF’
             ;   F -> *T {output ‘*’} F’ | /T {output ‘/’} F’ | <empty string>
             ;   T -> -T {output ‘neg’} | S
             ;   S -> <constant> {output constant} | (E)
             ;
             ;   UCR Standard Library Pattern which handles the grammar above:

             ; An expression consists of an “E” item followed by the end of the string:

             infix2rpn           pattern    {sl_Match2,E,,EndOfString}
             EndOfString         pattern    {EOS}

             ; An “E” item consists of an “F” item optionally followed by “+” or “-”
             ; and another “E” item:

             E                   pattern   {sl_Match2, F,,Eprime}
             Eprime              pattern   {MatchChar, ‘+’, Eprime2, epf}
             epf                 pattern   {sl_Match2, F,,epPlus}
             epPlus              pattern   {OutputPlus,,,Eprime}          ;Semantic rule

             Eprime2             pattern   {MatchChar, ‘-’, Succeed, emf}
             emf                 pattern   {sl_Match2, F,,epMinus}
             epMinus             pattern   {OutputMinus,,,Eprime}         ;Semantic rule

             ; An “F” item consists of a “T” item optionally followed by “*” or “/”
             ; followed by another “T” item:

             F                   pattern   {sl_Match2, T,,Fprime}
             Fprime              pattern   {MatchChar, ‘*’, Fprime2, fmf}
             fmf                 pattern   {sl_Match2, T, 0, pMul}
             pMul                pattern   {OutputMul,,,Fprime}           ;Semantic rule

             Fprime2             pattern   {MatchChar, ‘/’, Succeed, fdf}
             fdf                 pattern   {sl_Match2, T, 0, pDiv}
             pDiv                pattern   {OutputDiv, 0, 0,Fprime}       ;Semantic rule


Page 930
                                                                  Control Structures

; T item consists of an “S” item or a “-” followed by another “T” item:

T                pattern   {MatchChar, ‘-’, S, TT}
TT               pattern   {sl_Match2, T, 0,tpn}
tpn              pattern   {OutputNeg}                      ;Semantic rule

; An “S” item is either a string of one or more digits or “(“ followed by
; and “E” item followed by “)”:

Const            pattern   {sl_Match2, DoDigits, 0, spd}
spd              pattern   {OutputDigits}                   ;Semantic rule

DoDigits         pattern   {Anycset, Digits, 0, SpanDigits}
SpanDigits       pattern   {Spancset, Digits}

S                pattern   {MatchChar, ‘(‘, Const, IntE}
IntE             pattern   {sl_Match2, E, 0, CloseParen}
CloseParen       pattern   {MatchChar, ‘)’}


Succeed          pattern   {DoSucceed}


                 include   stdsets.a

dseg             ends



cseg             segment   para public ‘code’
                 assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

; DoSucceed matches the empty string. In other words, it matches anything
; and always returns success without eating any characters from the input
; string.

DoSucceed        proc      far
                 mov       ax, di
                 stc
                 ret
DoSucceed        endp


; OutputPlus is a semantic rule which outputs the “+” operator after the
; parser sees a valid addition operator in the infix string.

OutputPlus       proc      far
                 print
                 byte      “ +”,0
                 mov       ax, di                    ;Required by sl_Match
                 stc
                 ret
OutputPlus       endp


; OutputMinus is a semantic rule which outputs the “-” operator after the
; parser sees a valid subtraction operator in the infix string.

OutputMinus      proc      far
                 print
                 byte      “ -”,0
                 mov       ax, di                    ;Required by sl_Match
                 stc
                 ret
OutputMinus      endp


; OutputMul is a semantic rule which outputs the “*” operator after the
; parser sees a valid multiplication operator in the infix string.



                                                                             Page 931
Chapter 16

             OutputMul        proc      far
                              print
                              byte      “ *”,0
                              mov       ax, di                 ;Required by sl_Match
                              stc
                              ret
             OutputMul        endp


             ; OutputDiv is a semantic rule which outputs the “/” operator after the
             ; parser sees a valid division operator in the infix string.

             OutputDiv        proc      far
                              print
                              byte      “ /”,0
                              mov       ax, di                 ;Required by sl_Match
                              stc
                              ret
             OutputDiv        endp


             ; OutputNeg is a semantic rule which outputs the unary “-” operator after the
             ; parser sees a valid negation operator in the infix string.

             OutputNeg        proc      far
                              print
                              byte      “ neg”,0
                              mov       ax, di                 ;Required by sl_Match
                              stc
                              ret
             OutputNeg        endp


             ; OutputDigits outputs the numeric value when it encounters a legal integer
             ; value in the input string.

             OutputDigits     proc      far
                              push      es
                              push      di
                              mov       al, ‘ ‘
                              putc
                              lesi      const
                              patgrab
                              puts
                              free
                              stc
                              pop       di
                              mov       ax, di
                              pop       es
                              ret
             OutputDigits     endp



             ; Okay, here’s the main program which fetches the command line parameter
             ; and parses it.

             Main             proc
                              mov       ax, dseg
                              mov       ds, ax
                              mov       es, ax

                              meminit                          ; memory to the heap.


                              print
                              byte      “Enter an arithmetic expression: “,0
                              getsm
                              print
                              byte      “Expression in postfix form: “,0


Page 932
                                                                                        Control Structures


                                ldxi       infix2rpn
                                xor        cx, cx
                                match
                                jc         Succeeded

                                print
                                byte       “Syntax error”,0

            Succeeded:          putcr

            Quit:               ExitPgm
            Main                endp

            cseg                ends



            ; Allocate a reasonable amount of space for the stack (8k).

            sseg                segment    para stack ‘stack’
            stk                 db         1024 dup (“stack “)
            sseg                ends


            ; zzzzzzseg must be the last segment that gets loaded into memory!

            zzzzzzseg           segment    para public ‘zzzzzz’
            LastBytes           db         16 dup (?)
            zzzzzzseg           ends
                                end        Main




16.7   Constructing Patterns for the MATCH Routine
                 A major issue we have yet to discuss is how to convert regular expressions and con-
            text free grammars into patterns suitable for the UCR Standard Library pattern matching
            routines. Most of the examples appearing up to this point have used an ad hoc translation
            scheme; now it is time to provide an algorithm to accomplish this.
                The following algorithm converts a context free grammar to a UCR Standard Library
            pattern data structure. If you want to convert a regular expression to a pattern, first con-
            vert the regular expression to a context free grammar (see “Converting REs to CFGs” on
            page 905). Of course, it is easy to convert many regular expression forms directly to a pat-
            tern, when such conversions are obvious you can bypass the following algorithm; for
            example, it should be obvious that you can use spancset to match a regular expression like
            [0-9]*.
                 The first step you must always take is to eliminate left recursion from the grammar.
            You will generate an infinite loop (and crash the machine) if you attempt to code a gram-
            mar containing left recursion into a pattern data structure. For information on eliminating
            left recursion, see “Eliminating Left Recursion and Left Factoring CFGs” on page 903. You
            might also want to left factor the grammar while you are eliminating left recursion. The
            Standard Library routines fully support backtracking, so left factoring is not strictly neces-
            sary, however, the matching routine will execute faster if it does not need to backtrack.
               If a grammar production takes the form A → B C where A, B, and C are nonterminal
            symbols, you would create the following pattern:
            A                   pattern    {sl_match2,B,0,C}

            This pattern description for A checks for an occurrence of a B pattern followed by a C
            pattern.




                                                                                                 Page 933
Chapter 16

                 If B is a relatively simple production (that is, you can convert it to a single pattern
             data structure), you can optimize this to:
             A                    pattern     {B’s Matching Function, B’s parameter, 0, C}

             The remaining examples will always call sl_match2, just to be consistent. However, as long
             as the nonterminals you invoke are simple, you can fold them into A’’s pattern.
                 If a grammar production takes the form A → B | C where A, B, and C are nontermi-
             nal symbols, you would create the following pattern:
             A                    pattern     {sl_match2, B, C}

             This pattern tries to match B. If it succeeds, A succeeds; if it fails, it tries to match C. At this
             point, A’’s success or failure is the success or failure of C.
                  Handling terminal symbols is the next thing to consider. These are quite easy – all you
             need to do is use the appropriate matching function provided by the Standard Library,
             e.g., matchstr or matchchar. For example, if you have a production of the form A → abc | y
             you would convert this to the following pattern:
             A                    pattern     {matchstr,abc,ypat}
             abc                  byte        “abc”,0
             ypat                 pattern     {matchchar,’y’}

                 The only remaining detail to consider is the empty string. If you have a production of
             the form A → ε then you need to write a pattern matching function that always succeed.
             The elegant way to do this is to write a custom pattern matching function. This function is
             succeed           proc         far
                               mov          ax, di                   ;Required by sl_match
                               stc                                   ;Always succeed.
                               ret
             succeed           endp

             Another, sneaky, way to force success is to use matchstr and pass it the empty string to
             match, e.g.,
             success              pattern     {matchstr, emptystr}
             emptystr             byte        0

             The empty string always matches the input string, no matter what the input string con-
             tains.
                 If you have a production with several alternatives and ε is one of them, you must pro-
             cess ε last. For example, if you have the productions A → abc | y | BC | ε you would
             use the following pattern:
             A                    pattern     {matchstr,abc, tryY}
             abc                  byte        “abc”,0
             tryY                 pattern     {matchchar, ‘y’, tryBC}
             tryBC                pattern     {sl_match2, B, DoSuccess, C}
             DoSuccess            pattern     {succeed}

                 While the technique described above will let you convert any CFG to a pattern that
             the Standard Library can process, it certainly does not take advantage of the Standard
             Library facilities, nor will it produce particularly efficient patterns. For example, consider
             the production:
             Digits →     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9

             Converting this to a pattern using the techniques described above will yield the pattern:
             Digits            pattern      {matchchar, ‘0’, try1}
             try1              pattern      {matchchar, ‘1’, try2}
             try2              pattern      {matchchar, ‘2’, try3}
             try3              pattern      {matchchar, ‘3’, try4}
             try4              pattern      {matchchar, ‘4’, try5}
             try5              pattern      {matchchar, ‘5’, try6}
             try6              pattern      {matchchar, ‘6’, try7}


Page 934
                                                                                                 Control Structures

                try7              pattern       {matchchar, ‘7’, try8}
                try8              pattern       {matchchar, ‘8’, try9}
                try9              pattern       {matchchar, ‘9’}

                Obviously this isn’t a very good solution because we can match this same pattern with the
                single statement:
                Digits                pattern     {anycset, digits}

                     If your pattern is easy to specify using a regular expression, you should try to encode
                it using the built-in pattern matching functions and fall back on the above algorithm once
                you’ve handled the low level patterns as best you can. With experience, you will be able to
                choose an appropriate balance between the algorithm in this section and ad hoc methods
                you develop on your own.



16.8     Some Sample Pattern Matching Applications
                    The best way to learn how to convert a pattern matching problem to the respective
                pattern matching algorithms is by example. The following sections provide several exam-
                ples of some small pattern matching problems and their solutions.



16.8.1     Converting Written Numbers to Integers
                    One interesting pattern matching problem is to convert written (English) numbers to
                their integer equivalents. For example, take the string “one hundred ninety-two” and con-
                vert it to the integer 192. Although written numbers represent a pattern quite a bit more
                complex than the ones we’ve seen thus far, a little study will show that it is easy to decom-
                pose such strings.
                    The first thing we will need to do is enumerate the English words we will need to pro-
                cess written numbers. This includes the following words:
                         zero, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven twelve,
                         thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty,
                         thirty, forty, fifty sixty, seventy, eighty, ninety, hundred, and thousand.
                With this set of words we can build all the values between zero and 65,535 (the values we
                can represent in a 16 bit integer.
                    Next, we’ve got to decide how to put these words together to form all the values
                between zero and 65,535. The first thing to note is that zero only occurs by itself, it is never
                part of another number. So our first production takes the form:
                Number →      zero | NonZero

                    The next thing to note is that certain values may occur in pairs, denoting addition. For
                example, eighty-five denotes the sum of eighty plus five. Also note that certain other pairs
                denote multiplication. If you have a statement like “two hundred” or “fifteen hundred”
                the “hundred” word says multiply the preceding value by 100. The multiplicative words,
                “hundred” and “thousand” , are also additive. Any value following these terms is added
                in to the total9; e.g., “one hundred five” means 1*100+5. By combining the appropriate
                rules, we obtain the following grammar
                NonZero →         Thousands Maybe100s | Hundreds
                Thousands →       Under100 thousand
                Maybe100s →       Hundreds | ε
                Hundreds →        Under100 hundred After100 | Under100
                After100 →        Under100 | ε


   9. We will ignore special multiplicative forms like “one thousand thousand” (one million) because these forms are
   all too large to fit into 16 bits. .


                                                                                                          Page 935
Chapter 16

             Under100 →     Tens Maybe1s| Teens | ones
             Maybe1s →      Ones | ε
             ones → one | two | three | four | five | six | seven | eight | nine
             teens → ten | eleven | twelve | thirteen | fourteen | fifteen | sixteen |
                      seventeen | eighteen | nineteen
             tens → twenty | thirty | forty | fifty | sixty | seventy | eighty | ninety


                  The final step is to add semantic actions to actually convert the strings matched by
             this grammar to integer values. The basic idea is to initialize an accumulator value to zero.
             Whenever you encounter one of the strings that ones, teens, or tens matches, you add the
             corresponding value to the accumulator. If you encounter the hundred or thousand
             strings, you multiply the accumulator by the appropriate factor. The complete program to
             do the conversion follows:
             ;   Numbers.asm
             ;
             ;   This program converts written English numbers in the range “zero”
             ;   to “sixty five thousand five hundred thirty five” to the corresponding
             ;   integer value.

                                 .xlist
                                 include    stdlib.a
                                 includelib stdlib.lib
                                 matchfuncs
                                 .list


             dseg                segment    para public ‘data’

             Value               word       0                           ;Store results here.
             HundredsVal         word       0
             ThousandsVal        word       0


             Str0                byte       “twenty one”,0
             Str1                byte       “nineteen hundred thirty-five”,0
             Str2                byte       “thirty three thousand two hundred nineteen”,0
             Str3                byte       “three”,0
             Str4                byte       “fourteen”,0
             Str5                byte       “fifty two”,0
             Str6                byte       “seven hundred”,0
             Str7                byte       “two thousand seven”,0
             Str8                byte       “four thousand ninety six”,0
             Str9                byte       “five hundred twelve”,0
             Str10               byte       “twenty three thousand two hundred ninety-five”,0
             Str11               byte       “seventy-five hundred”,0
             Str12               byte       “sixty-five thousand”,0
             Str13               byte       “one thousand”,0


             ;   The following grammar is what we use to process the numbers.
             ;   Semantic actions appear in the braces.
             ;
             ;   Note: begin by initializing Value, HundredsVal, and ThousandsVal to zero.
             ;
             ;   N               -> separators zero
             ;                   | N4
             ;
             ;   N4              -> do1000s maybe100s
             ;                   | do100s
             ;
             ;   Maybe100s       -> do100s
             ;                   | <empty string>
             ;
             ;   do1000s         -> Under100 “THOUSAND” separators
             ;                              {ThousandsVal := Value*1000}
             ;
             ;   do100s          -> Under100 “HUNDRED”

Page 936
                                                                 Control Structures

;                       {HundredsVal := Value*100} After100
;              | Under100
;
;   After100   -> {Value := 0} Under100
;              | {Value := 0} <empty string>
;
;   Under100   -> {Value := 0} try20 try1s
;              | {Value := 0} doTeens
;              | {Value := 0} do1s
;
;   try1s      -> do1s | <empty string>
;
;   try20      -> “TWENTY” {Value := Value + 20}
;              | “THIRTY” {Value := Value + 30}
;              | ...
;              | “NINETY” {Value := Value + 90}
;
;   doTeens    -> “TEN” {Value := Value + 10}
;              | “ELEVEN” {Value := Value + 11}
;              | ...
;              | “NINETEEN” {Value := Value + 19}
;
;   do1s       -> “ONE” {Value := Value + 1}
;              | “TWO” {Value := Value + 2}
;              | ...
;              | “NINE” {Value := Value + 9}


separators     pattern   {anycset, delimiters, 0, delim2}
delim2         pattern   {spancset, delimiters}
doSuccess      pattern   {succeed}
AtLast         pattern   {sl_match2, separators, AtEOS, AtEOS}
AtEOS          pattern   {EOS}


N              pattern   {sl_match2, separators, N2, N2}
N2             pattern   {matchistr, zero, N3, AtLast}
zero           byte      “ZERO”,0

N3             pattern   {sl_match2, N4, 0, AtLast}
N4             pattern   {sl_match2, do1000s, do100s, Maybe100s}
Maybe100s      pattern   {sl_match2, do100s, AtLast, AtLast}

do1000s        pattern   {sl_match2, Under100, 0, do1000s2}
do1000s2       pattern   {matchistr, str1000, 0, do1000s3}
do1000s3       pattern   {sl_match2, separators, do1000s4, do1000s5}
do1000s4       pattern   {EOS, 0, 0, do1000s5}
do1000s5       pattern   {Get1000s}
str1000        byte      “THOUSAND”,0

do100s         pattern   {sl_match2,   do100s1, Under100, After100}
do100s1        pattern   {sl_match2,   Under100, 0, do100s2}
do100s2        pattern   {matchistr,   str100, 0, do100s3}
do100s3        pattern   {sl_match2,   separators, do100s4, do100s5}
do100s4        pattern   {EOS, 0, 0,   do100s5}
do100s5        pattern   {Get100s}
str100         byte      “HUNDRED”,0

After100       pattern   {SetVal, 0, 0, After100a}
After100a      pattern   {sl_match2, Under100, doSuccess}

Under100       pattern   {SetVal, 0, 0, Under100a}
Under100a      pattern   {sl_match2, try20, Under100b, Do1orE}
Under100b      pattern   {sl_match2, doTeens, do1s}

Do1orE         pattern   {sl_match2, do1s, doSuccess, 0}



NumPat         macro     lbl, next, Constant, string


                                                                         Page 937
Chapter 16

                              local     try, SkipSpcs, val, str, tryEOS
             lbl              pattern   {sl_match2, try, next}
             try              pattern   {matchistr, str, 0, SkipSpcs}
             SkipSpcs         pattern   {sl_match2, separators, tryEOS, val}
             tryEOS           pattern   {EOS, 0, 0, val}
             val              pattern   {AddVal, Constant}
             str              byte      string
                              byte      0
                              endm

                              NumPat    doTeens, try11, 10, “TEN”
                              NumPat    try11, try12, 11, “ELEVEN”
                              NumPat    try12, try13, 12, “TWELVE”
                              NumPat    try13, try14, 13, “THIRTEEN”
                              NumPat    try14, try15, 14, “FOURTEEN”
                              NumPat    try15, try16, 15, “FIFTEEN”
                              NumPat    try16, try17, 16, “SIXTEEN”
                              NumPat    try17, try18, 17, “SEVENTEEN”
                              NumPat    try18, try19, 18, “EIGHTEEN”
                              NumPat    try19, 0, 19, “NINETEEN”

                              NumPat    do1s,   try2,   1, “ONE”
                              NumPat    try2,   try3,   2, “TWO”
                              NumPat    try3,   try4,   3, “THREE”
                              NumPat    try4,   try5,   4, “FOUR”
                              NumPat    try5,   try6,   5, “FIVE”
                              NumPat    try6,   try7,   6, “SIX”
                              NumPat    try7,   try8,   7, “SEVEN”
                              NumPat    try8,   try9,   8, “EIGHT”
                              NumPat    try9,   0, 9,   “NINE”

                              NumPat    try20,   try30,   20, “TWENTY”
                              NumPat    try30,   try40,   30, “THIRTY”
                              NumPat    try40,   try50,   40, “FORTY”
                              NumPat    try50,   try60,   50, “FIFTY”
                              NumPat    try60,   try70,   60, “SIXTY”
                              NumPat    try70,   try80,   70, “SEVENTY”
                              NumPat    try80,   try90,   80, “EIGHTY”
                              NumPat    try90,   0, 90,   “NINETY”

                              include   stdsets.a

             dseg             ends



             cseg             segment   para public ‘code’
                              assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg


             ; Semantic actions for our grammar:
             ;
             ;
             ;
             ; Get1000s-      We’ve just processed the value one..nine, grab it from
             ;                the value variable, multiply it by 1000, and store it
             ;                into thousandsval.

             Get1000s         proc      far
                              push      ds
                              push      dx
                              mov       ax, dseg
                              mov       ds, ax

                              mov       ax, 1000
                              mul       Value
                              mov       ThousandsVal, ax
                              mov       Value, 0

                              pop       dx


Page 938
                                                                Control Structures

                 mov      ax, di                  ;Required by sl_match.
                 pop      ds
                 stc                              ;Always return success.
                 ret
Get1000s         endp


; Get100s-       We’ve just processed the value one..nine, grab it from
;                the value variable, multiply it by 100, and store it
;                into hundredsval.

Get100s          proc     far
                 push     ds
                 push     dx
                 mov      ax, dseg
                 mov      ds, ax

                 mov      ax, 100
                 mul      Value
                 mov      HundredsVal, ax
                 mov      Value, 0

                 pop      dx
                 mov      ax, di                  ;Required by sl_match.
                 pop      ds
                 stc                              ;Always return success.
                 ret
Get100s          endp


; SetVal-        This routine sets Value to whatever is in si

SetVal           proc     far
                 push     ds
                 mov      ax, dseg
                 mov      ds, ax
                 mov      Value, si
                 mov      ax, di
                 pop      ds
                 stc
                 ret
SetVal           endp

; AddVal-        This routine sets adds whatever is in si to Value

AddVal           proc     far
                 push     ds
                 mov      ax, dseg
                 mov      ds, ax
                 add      Value, si
                 mov      ax, di
                 pop      ds
                 stc
                 ret
AddVal           endp


; Succeed matches the empty string. In other words, it matches anything
; and always returns success without eating any characters from the input
; string.

Succeed          proc     far
                 mov      ax, di
                 stc
                 ret
Succeed          endp


; This subroutine expects a pointer to a string containing the English
; version of an integer number. It converts this to an integer and


                                                                          Page 939
Chapter 16

             ; prints the result.

             ConvertNumber    proc      near
                              mov       value, 0
                              mov       HundredsVal, 0
                              mov       ThousandsVal, 0

                              ldxi      N
                              xor       cx, cx
                              match
                              jnc       NoMatch
                              mov       al, “‘”
                              putc
                              puts
                              print
                              byte      “‘ = “, 0
                              mov       ax, ThousandsVal
                              add       ax, HundredsVal
                              add       ax, Value
                              putu
                              putcr
                              jmp       Done

             NoMatch:         print
                              byte      “Illegal number”,cr,lf,0

             Done:            ret
             ConvertNumber    endp



             Main             proc
                              mov       ax, dseg
                              mov       ds, ax
                              mov       es, ax

                              meminit                          ;Init memory manager.

             ; Union in a “-” to the delimiters set because numbers can have
             ; dashes in them.

                              lesi      delimiters
                              mov       al, ‘-’
                              addchar

             ; Some calls to test the ConvertNumber routine and the conversion process.

                              lesi      Str0
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str1
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str2
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str3
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str4
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str5
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str6
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str7
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str8
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str9
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str10
                              call      ConvertNumber
                              lesi      Str11


Page 940
                                                                                        Control Structures

                                call       ConvertNumber
                                lesi       Str12
                                call       ConvertNumber
                                lesi       Str13
                                call       ConvertNumber


            Quit:               ExitPgm
            Main                endp

            cseg                ends

            sseg                segment    para stack ‘stack’
            stk                 db         1024 dup (“stack “)
            sseg                ends

            zzzzzzseg           segment    para public ‘zzzzzz’
            LastBytes           db         16 dup (?)
            zzzzzzseg           ends
                                end        Main


            Sample output:
            ‘twenty one’ = 21
            ‘nineteen hundred thirty-five’ = 1935
            ‘thirty three thousand two hundred nineteen’ = 33219
            ‘three’ = 3
            ‘fourteen’ = 14
            ‘fifty two’ = 52
            ‘seven hundred’ = 700
            ‘two thousand seven’ = 2007
            ‘four thousand ninety six’ = 4096
            ‘five hundred twelve’ = 512
            ‘twenty three thousand two hundred ninety-five’ = 23295
            ‘seventy-five hundred’ = 7500
            ‘sixty-five thousand’ = 65000
            ‘one thousand’ = 1000



16.8.2   Processing Dates
                 Another useful program that converts English text to numeric form is a date proces-
            sor. A date processor takes strings like “Jan 23, 1997” and converts it to three integer val-
            ues representing the month, day, and year. Of course, while we’re at it, it’s easy enough to
            modify the grammar for date strings to allow the input string to take any of the following
            common date formats:
                                Jan 23, 1997
                                January 23, 1997
                                23 Jan, 1997
                                23 January, 1997
                                1/23/97
                                1-23-97
                                1/23/1997
                                1-23-1997

            In each of these cases the date processing routines should store one into the variable
            month, 23 into the variable day, and 1997 into the year variable (we will assume all years
            are in the range 1900-1999 if the string supplies only two digits for the year). Of course, we
            could also allow dates like “January twenty-third, nineteen hundred and ninety seven” by
            using an number processing parser similar to the one presented in the previous section.
            However, that is an exercise left to the reader.
                The grammar to process dates is
            Date →              EngMon Integer Integer |
                                Integer EngMon Integer |


                                                                                                 Page 941
Chapter 16

                                Integer / Integer / Integer |
                                Integer - Integer - Integer

             EngMon →           JAN | JANUARY | FEB | FEBRUARY | … | DEC | DECEMBER
             Integer →          digit Integer | digit
             digit →            0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9

                 We will use some semantic rules to place some restrictions on these strings. For exam-
             ple, the grammar above allows integers of any size; however, months must fall in the
             range 1-12 and days must fall in the range 1-28, 1-29, 1-30, or 1-31 depending on the year
             and month. Years must fall in the range 0-99 or 1900-1999.
                 Here is the 80x86 code for this grammar:
             ; datepat.asm
             ;
             ; This program converts dates of various formats to a three integer
             ; component value- month, day, and year.

                                .xlist
                                .286
                                include    stdlib.a
                                includelib stdlib.lib
                                matchfuncs
                                .list
                                .lall


             dseg               segment    para public ‘data’

             ; The following three variables hold the result of the conversion.

             month              word       0
             day                word       0
             year               word       0

             ; StrPtr is a double word value that points at the string under test.
             ; The output routines use this variable. It is declared as two word
             ; values so it is easier to store es:di into it.

             strptr             word       0,0

             ; Value is a generic variable the ConvertInt routine uses

             value              word       0



             ; Number of valid days in each month (Feb is handled specially)

             DaysInMonth        byte       31, 28, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31



             ; Some sample strings to test the date conversion routines.

             Str0               byte       “Feb 4, 1956”,0
             Str1               byte       “July 20, 1960”,0
             Str2               byte       “Jul 8, 1964”,0
             Str3               byte       “1/1/97”,0
             Str4               byte       “1-1-1997”,0
             Str5               byte       “12-25-74”,0
             Str6               byte       “3/28/1981”,0
             Str7               byte       “January 1, 1999”,0
             Str8               byte       “Feb 29, 1996”,0
             Str9               byte       “30 June, 1990”,0
             Str10              byte       “August 7, 1945”,0
             Str11              byte       “30 September, 1992”,0
             Str12              byte       “Feb 29, 1990”,0
             Str13              byte       “29 Feb, 1992”,0


Page 942
                                                                    Control Structures




;   The following grammar is what we use to process the dates
;
;   Date ->        EngMon Integer Integer
;        |         Integer EngMon Integer
;        |         Integer “/” Integer “/” Integer
;        |         Integer “-” Integer “-” Integer
;
;   EngMon->       Jan | January | Feb | February | ... | Dec | December
;   Integer->      digit integer | digit
;   digit->        0 | 1 | ... | 9
;
;   Some semantic rules this code has to check:
;
;   If the year is in the range 0-99, this code has to add 1900 to it.
;   If the year is not in the range 0-99 or 1900-1999 then return an error.
;   The month must be in the range 1-12, else return an error.
;   The day must be between one and 28, 29, 30, or 31. The exact maximum
;   day depends on the month.


separators         pattern   {spancset, delimiters}


; DatePat processes dates of the form “MonInEnglish Day Year”

DatePat            pattern   {sl_match2, EngMon, DatePat2, DayYear}
DayYear            pattern   {sl_match2, DayInteger, 0, YearPat}
YearPat            pattern   {sl_match2, YearInteger}

; DatePat2 processes dates of the form “Day MonInEng Year”

DatePat2           pattern   {sl_match2, DayInteger, DatePat3, MonthYear}
MonthYear          pattern   {sl_match2, EngMon, 0, YearPat}

; DatePat3 processes dates of the form “mm-dd-yy”

DatePat3           pattern   {sl_match2,   MonInteger, DatePat4, DatePat3a}
DatePat3a          pattern   {sl_match2,   separators, DatePat3b, DatePat3b}
DatePat3b          pattern   {matchchar,   ‘-’, 0, DatePat3c}
DatePat3c          pattern   {sl_match2,   DayInteger, 0, DatePat3d}
DatePat3d          pattern   {sl_match2,   separators, DatePat3e, DatePat3e}
DatePat3e          pattern   {matchchar,   ‘-’, 0, DatePat3f}
DatePat3f          pattern   {sl_match2,   YearInteger}

; DatePat4 processes dates of the form “mm/dd/yy”

DatePat4           pattern   {sl_match2,   MonInteger, 0, DatePat4a}
DatePat4a          pattern   {sl_match2,   separators, DatePat4b, DatePat4b}
DatePat4b          pattern   {matchchar,   ‘/’, 0, DatePat4c}
DatePat4c          pattern   {sl_match2,   DayInteger, 0, DatePat4d}
DatePat4d          pattern   {sl_match2,   separators, DatePat4e, DatePat4e}
DatePat4e          pattern   {matchchar,   ‘/’, 0, DatePat4f}
DatePat4f          pattern   {sl_match2,   YearInteger}


; DayInteger matches an decimal string, converts it to an integer, and
; stores the result away in the Day variable.

DayInteger         pattern   {sl_match2, Integer, 0, SetDayPat}
SetDayPat          pattern   {SetDay}

; MonInteger matches an decimal string, converts it to an integer, and
; stores the result away in the Month variable.

MonInteger         pattern   {sl_match2, Integer, 0, SetMonPat}
SetMonPat          pattern   {SetMon}



                                                                            Page 943
Chapter 16

             ; YearInteger matches an decimal string, converts it to an integer, and
             ; stores the result away in the Year variable.


             YearInteger        pattern   {sl_match2, Integer, 0, SetYearPat}
             SetYearPat         pattern   {SetYear}


             ;   Integer skips any leading delimiter characters and then matches a
             ;   decimal string. The Integer0 pattern matches exactly the decimal
             ;   characters; the code does a patgrab on Integer0 when converting
             ;   this string to an integer.

             Integer            pattern   {sl_match2, separators, 0, Integer0}
             Integer0           pattern   {sl_match2, number, 0, Convert2Int}
             number             pattern   {anycset, digits, 0, number2}
             number2            pattern   {spancset, digits}
             Convert2Int        pattern   {ConvertInt}




             ; A macro to make it easy to declare each of the 24 English month
             ; patterns (24 because we allow the full month name and an
             ; abbreviation).

             MoPat              macro    name, next, str, str2, value
                                local SetMo, string, full, short, string2, doMon

             name               pattern   {sl_match2, short, next}
             short              pattern   {matchistr, string2, full, SetMo}
             full               pattern   {matchistr, string, 0, SetMo}

             string             byte str
                                byte     0

             string2            byte      str2
                                byte      0

             SetMo              pattern   {MonthVal, value}
                                endm


             ; EngMon is a chain of patterns that match one of the strings
             ; JAN, JANUARY, FEB, FEBRUARY, etc. The last parameter to the
             ; MoPat macro is the month number.

             EngMon             pattern {sl_match2, separators, jan, jan}
                                MoPat    jan, feb, “JAN”, “JANUARY”, 1
                                MoPat    feb, mar, “FEB”, “FEBRUARY”, 2
                                MoPat    mar, apr, “MAR”, “MARCH”, 3
                                MoPat    apr, may, “APR”, “APRIL”, 4
                                MoPat    may, jun, “MAY”, “MAY”, 5
                                MoPat    jun, jul, “JUN”, “JUNE”, 6
                                MoPat    jul, aug, “JUL”, “JULY”, 7
                                MoPat    aug, sep, “AUG”, “AUGUST”, 8
                                MoPat    sep, oct, “SEP”, “SEPTEMBER”, 9
                                MoPat    oct, nov, “OCT”, “OCTOBER”, 10
                                MoPat    nov, decem, “NOV”, “NOVEMBER”, 11
                                MoPat    decem, 0, “DEC”, “DECEMBER”, 12




             ; We use the “digits” and “delimiters” sets from the standard library.

                                include   stdsets.a

             dseg               ends



Page 944
                                                                Control Structures



cseg             segment   para public ‘code’
                 assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg


; ConvertInt-    Matches a sequence of digits and converts them to an integer.

ConvertInt       proc      far
                 push      ds
                 push      es
                 push      di
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax

                 lesi Integer0         ;Integer0 contains the decimal
                 patgrab               ; string we matched, grab that
                 atou                  ; string and convert it to an
                 mov      Value, ax    ; integer and save the result.
                 free                  ;Free mem allocated by patgrab.

                 pop       di
                 mov       ax, di      ;Required by sl_match.
                 pop       es
                 pop       ds
                 stc                   ;Always succeed.
                 ret

ConvertInt       endp


; SetDay, SetMon, and SetYear simply copy value to the appropriate
; variable.

SetDay           proc      far
                 push      ds
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax
                 mov       ax, value
                 mov       day, ax
                 mov       ax, di
                 pop       ds
                 stc
                 ret
SetDay           endp


SetMon           proc      far
                 push      ds
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax
                 mov       ax, value
                 mov       Month, ax
                 mov       ax, di
                 pop       ds
                 stc
                 ret
SetMon           endp


SetYear          proc      far
                 push      ds
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax
                 mov       ax, value
                 mov       Year, ax
                 mov       ax, di
                 pop       ds
                 stc
                 ret


                                                                         Page 945
Chapter 16

             SetYear          endp


             ; MonthVal is a pattern used by the English month patterns.
             ; This pattern function simply copies the matchparm field to
             ; the month variable (the matchparm field is passed in si).

             MonthVal         proc     far
                              push     ds
                              mov      ax, dseg
                              mov      ds, ax
                              mov      Month, si
                              mov      ax, di
                              pop      ds
                              stc
                              ret
             MonthVal         endp



             ; ChkDate-       Checks a date to see if it is valid. Returns with the
             ;                carry flag set if it is, clear if not.

             ChkDate          proc     far
                              push     ds
                              push     ax
                              push     bx

                              mov      ax, dseg
                              mov      ds, ax

             ; If the year is in the range 0-99, add 1900 to it.
             ; Then check to see if it’s in the range 1900-1999.

                              cmp      Year, 100
                              ja       Notb100
                              add      Year, 1900
             Notb100:         cmp      Year, 2000
                              jae      BadDate
                              cmp      Year, 1900
                              jb       BadDate

             ; Okay, make sure the month is in the range 1-12

                              cmp      Month, 12
                              ja       BadDate
                              cmp      Month, 1
                              jb       BadDate

             ; See if the number of days is correct for all months except Feb:

                              mov      bx, Month
                              mov      ax, Day                  ;Make sure Day <> 0.
                              test     ax, ax
                              je       BadDate
                              cmp      ah, 0                    ;Make sure Day < 256.
                              jne      BadDate

                              cmp      bx, 2                    ;Handle Feb elsewhere.
                              je       DoFeb
                              cmp      al, DaysInMonth[bx-1]    ;Check against max val.
                              ja       BadDate
                              jmp      GoodDate

             ; Kludge to handle leap years. Note that 1900 is *not* a leap year.

             DoFeb:           cmp      ax, 29                   ;Only applies if day is
                              jb       GoodDate                 ; equal to 29.
                              ja       BadDate                  ;Error if Day > 29.
                              mov      bx, Year                 ;1900 is not a leap year


Page 946
                                                                Control Structures

                 cmp       bx, 1900               ; so handle that here.
                 je        BadDate
                 and       bx, 11b                ;Else, Year mod 4 is a
                 jne       BadDate                ; leap year.

GoodDate:        pop       bx
                 pop       ax
                 pop       ds
                 stc
                 ret

BadDate:         pop       bx
                 pop       ax
                 pop       ds
                 clc
                 ret
ChkDate          endp


; ConvertDate-   ES:DI contains a pointer to a string containing a valid
;                date. This routine converts that date to the three
;                integer values found in the Month, Day, and Year
;                variables. Then it prints them to verify the pattern
;                matching routine.

ConvertDate      proc      near

                 ldxi      DatePat
                 xor       cx, cx
                 match
                 jnc       NoMatch

                 mov       strptr, di             ;Save string pointer for
                 mov       strptr+2, es           ; use by printf

                 call      ChkDate                ;Validate the date.
                 jnc       NoMatch

                 printf
                 byte      “%-20^s = Month: %2d Day: %2d Year: %4d\n”,0
                 dword     strptr, Month, Day, Year
                 jmp       Done

NoMatch:         printf
                 byte      “Illegal date (‘%^s’)”,cr,lf,0
                 dword     strptr

Done:            ret
ConvertDate      endp




Main             proc
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax
                 mov       es, ax

                 meminit                          ;Init memory manager.

; Call ConvertDate to test several different date strings.

                 lesi      Str0
                 call      ConvertDate
                 lesi      Str1
                 call      ConvertDate
                 lesi      Str2
                 call      ConvertDate
                 lesi      Str3
                 call      ConvertDate


                                                                          Page 947
Chapter 16

                                    lesi       Str4
                                    call       ConvertDate
                                    lesi       Str5
                                    call       ConvertDate
                                    lesi       Str6
                                    call       ConvertDate
                                    lesi       Str7
                                    call       ConvertDate
                                    lesi       Str8
                                    call       ConvertDate
                                    lesi       Str9
                                    call       ConvertDate
                                    lesi       Str10
                                    call       ConvertDate
                                    lesi       Str11
                                    call       ConvertDate
                                    lesi       Str12
                                    call       ConvertDate
                                    lesi       Str13
                                    call       ConvertDate


                Quit:               ExitPgm
                Main                endp

                cseg                ends

                sseg                segment    para stack ‘stack’
                stk                 db         1024 dup (“stack “)
                sseg                ends

                zzzzzzseg           segment    para public ‘zzzzzz’
                LastBytes           db         16 dup (?)
                zzzzzzseg           ends
                                    end        Main



                Sample Output:
                Feb 4, 1956                = Month: 2 Day: 4 Year: 1956
                July 20, 1960              = Month: 7 Day: 20 Year: 1960
                Jul 8, 1964                = Month: 7 Day: 8 Year: 1964
                1/1/97                     = Month: 1 Day: 1 Year: 1997
                1-1-1997                   = Month: 1 Day: 1 Year: 1997
                12-25-74                   = Month: 12 Day: 25 Year: 1974
                3/28/1981                  = Month: 3 Day: 28 Year: 1981
                January 1, 1999            = Month: 1 Day: 1 Year: 1999
                Feb 29, 1996               = Month: 2 Day: 29 Year: 1996
                30 June, 1990              = Month: 6 Day: 30 Year: 1990
                August 7, 1945             = Month: 8 Day: 7 Year: 1945
                30 September, 1992         = Month: 9 Day: 30 Year: 1992
                Illegal date (‘Feb 29, 1990’)
                29 Feb, 1992               = Month: 2 Day: 29 Year: 1992




16.8.3       Evaluating Arithmetic Expressions
                     Many programs (e.g., spreadsheets, interpreters, compilers, and assemblers) need to
                process arithmetic expressions. The following example provides a simple calculator that
                operates on floating point numbers. This particular program uses the 80x87 FPU chip,
                although it would not be too difficult to modify it so that it uses the floating point routines
                in the UCR Standard Library.
                ; ARITH2.ASM
                ;
                ; A simple floating point calculator that demonstrates the use of the
                ; UCR Standard Library pattern matching routines. Note that this

Page 948
                                                                    Control Structures

; program requires an FPU.

                   .xlist
                   .386
                   .387
                   option   segment:use16
                   include    stdlib.a
                   includelib stdlib.lib
                   matchfuncs
                   .list

dseg               segment   para public ‘data’

; The following is a temporary used when converting a floating point
; string to a 64 bit real value.

CurValue           real8     0.0

; Some sample strings containing expressions to try out:

Str1               byte      “5+2*(3-1)”,0
Str2               byte      “(5+2)*(7-10)”,0
Str3               byte      “5”,0
Str4               byte      “(6+2)/(5+1)-7e5*2/1.3e2+1.5”,0
Str5               byte      “2.5*(2-(3+1)/4+1)”,0
Str6               byte      “6+(-5*2)”,0
Str7               byte      “6*-1”,0
Str8               byte      “1.2e5/2.1e5”,0
Str9               byte      “0.9999999999999999+1e-15”,0
str10              byte      “2.1-1.1”,0

;   Grammar for simple infix -> postfix translation operation:
;   Semantic rules appear in braces.
;
;   E -> FE’ {print result}
;   E’ -> +F {fadd} E’ | -F {fsub} E’ | <empty string>
;   F -> TF’
;   F -> *T {fmul} F’ | /T {fdiv} F’ | <empty string>
;   T -> -T {fchs} | S
;   S -> <constant> {fld constant} | (E)
;
;
;
;   UCR Standard Library Pattern which handles the grammar above:

; An expression consists of an “E” item followed by the end of the string:

Expression         pattern   {sl_Match2,E,,EndOfString}
EndOfString        pattern   {EOS}

; An “E” item consists of an “F” item optionally followed by “+” or “-”
; and another “E” item:

E                  pattern   {sl_Match2, F,,Eprime}
Eprime             pattern   {MatchChar, ‘+’, Eprime2, epf}
epf                pattern   {sl_Match2, F,,epPlus}
epPlus             pattern   {DoFadd,,,Eprime}

Eprime2            pattern   {MatchChar, ‘-’, Succeed, emf}
emf                pattern   {sl_Match2, F,,epMinus}
epMinus            pattern   {DoFsub,,,Eprime}

; An “F” item consists of a “T” item optionally followed by “*” or “/”
; followed by another “T” item:

F                  pattern   {sl_Match2, T,,Fprime}
Fprime             pattern   {MatchChar, ‘*’, Fprime2, fmf}
fmf                pattern   {sl_Match2, T, 0, pMul}
pMul               pattern   {DoFmul,,,Fprime}



                                                                            Page 949
Chapter 16

             Fprime2             pattern   {MatchChar, ‘/’, Succeed, fdf}
             fdf                 pattern   {sl_Match2, T, 0, pDiv}
             pDiv                pattern   {DoFdiv, 0, 0,Fprime}

             ; T item consists of an “S” item or a “-” followed by another “T” item:

             T                   pattern   {MatchChar, ‘-’, S, TT}
             TT                  pattern   {sl_Match2, T, 0,tpn}
             tpn                 pattern   {DoFchs}

             ;   An “S” item is either a floating point constant or “(“ followed by
             ;   and “E” item followed by “)”.
             ;
             ;   The regular expression for a floating point constant is
             ;
             ;         [0-9]+ ( “.” [0-9]* | ) ( ((e|E) (+|-| ) [0-9]+) | )
             ;
             ;   Note: the pattern “Const” matches exactly the characters specified
             ;        by the above regular expression. It is the pattern the calc-
             ;        ulator grabs when converting a string to a floating point number.

             Const               pattern   {sl_match2,   ConstStr, 0, FLDConst}
             ConstStr            pattern   {sl_match2,   DoDigits, 0, Const2}
             Const2              pattern   {matchchar,   ‘.’, Const4, Const3}
             Const3              pattern   {sl_match2,   DoDigits, Const4, Const4}
             Const4              pattern   {matchchar,   ‘e’, const5, const6}
             Const5              pattern   {matchchar,   ‘E’, Succeed, const6}
             Const6              pattern   {matchchar,   ‘+’, const7, const8}
             Const7              pattern   {matchchar,   ‘-’, const8, const8}
             Const8              pattern   {sl_match2,   DoDigits}

             FldConst            pattern   {PushValue}

             ; DoDigits handles the regular expression [0-9]+

             DoDigits            pattern   {Anycset, Digits, 0, SpanDigits}
             SpanDigits          pattern   {Spancset, Digits}

             ; The S production handles constants or an expression in parentheses.

             S                   pattern   {MatchChar, ‘(‘, Const, IntE}
             IntE                pattern   {sl_Match2, E, 0, CloseParen}
             CloseParen          pattern   {MatchChar, ‘)’}

             ; The Succeed pattern always succeeds.

             Succeed             pattern   {DoSucceed}


             ; We use digits from the UCR Standard Library cset standard sets.

                                 include   stdsets.a

             dseg                ends



             cseg                segment   para public ‘code’
                                 assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

             ; DoSucceed matches the empty string. In other words, it matches anything
             ; and always returns success without eating any characters from the input
             ; string.

             DoSucceed           proc      far
                                 mov       ax, di
                                 stc
                                 ret
             DoSucceed           endp



Page 950
                                                                   Control Structures


; DoFadd - Adds the two items on the top of the FPU stack.

DoFadd           proc      far
                 faddp     st(1), st
                 mov       ax, di                    ;Required by sl_Match
                 stc                                 ;Always succeed.
                 ret
DoFadd           endp

; DoFsub - Subtracts the two values on the top of the FPU stack.

DoFsub           proc      far
                 fsubp     st(1), st
                 mov       ax, di                    ;Required by sl_Match
                 stc
                 ret
DoFsub           endp

; DoFmul- Multiplies the two values on the FPU stack.

DoFmul           proc      far
                 fmulp     st(1), st
                 mov       ax, di                    ;Required by sl_Match
                 stc
                 ret
DoFmul           endp

; DoFdiv- Divides the two values on the FPU stack.

DoFDiv           proc      far
                 fdivp     st(1), st
                 mov       ax, di                    ;Required by sl_Match
                 stc
                 ret
DoFDiv           endp

; DoFchs- Negates the value on the top of the FPU stack.

DoFchs           proc      far
                 fchs
                 mov       ax, di                    ;Required by sl_Match
                 stc
                 ret
DoFchs           endp


; PushValue-     We’ve just matched a string that corresponds to a
;                floating point constant. Convert it to a floating
;                point value and push that value onto the FPU stack.

PushValue        proc      far
                 push      ds
                 push      es
                 pusha
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax

                 lesi      Const       ;FP val matched by this pat.
                 patgrab               ;Get a copy of the string.
                 atof                  ;Convert to real.
                 free                  ;Return mem used by patgrab.
                 lesi      CurValue    ;Copy floating point accumulator
                 sdfpa                 ; to a local variable and then
                 fld       CurValue    ; copy that value to the FPU stk.

                 popa
                 mov       ax, di
                 pop       es
                 pop       ds


                                                                             Page 951
Chapter 16

                              stc
                              ret
             PushValue        endp

             ; DoExp-         This routine expects a pointer to a string containing
             ;                an arithmetic expression in ES:DI. It evaluates the
             ;                given expression and prints the result.

             DoExp            proc      near
                              finit                  ;Be sure to do this!
                              fwait

                              puts                   ;Print the expression

                              ldxi      Expression
                              xor       cx, cx
                              match
                              jc        GoodVal
                              printff
                              byte      “ is an illegal expression”,cr,lf,0
                              ret

             GoodVal:         fstp      CurValue
                              printff
                              byte      “ = %12.6ge\n”,0
                              dword     CurValue
                              ret
             DoExp            endp


             ; The main program tests the expression evaluator.

             Main             proc
                              mov       ax, dseg
                              mov       ds, ax
                              mov       es, ax
                              meminit

                              lesi      Str1
                              call      DoExp
                              lesi      Str2
                              call      DoExp
                              lesi      Str3
                              call      DoExp
                              lesi      Str4
                              call      DoExp
                              lesi      Str5
                              call      DoExp
                              lesi      Str6
                              call      DoExp
                              lesi      Str7
                              call      DoExp
                              lesi      Str8
                              call      DoExp
                              lesi      Str9
                              call      DoExp
                              lesi      Str10
                              call      DoExp

             Quit:            ExitPgm
             Main             endp

             cseg             ends

             sseg             segment   para stack ‘stack’
             stk              db        1024 dup (“stack “)
             sseg             ends

             zzzzzzseg        segment   para public ‘zzzzzz’
             LastBytes        db        16 dup (?)


Page 952
                                                                                                Control Structures

                zzzzzzseg            ends
                                     end         Main


                Sample Output:
                5+2*(3-1) = 9.000E+0000
                (5+2)*(7-10) = -2.100E+0001
                5 = 5.000E+0000
                (6+2)/(5+1)-7e5*2/1.3e2+1.5 = -1.077E+0004
                2.5*(2-(3+1)/4+1) = 5.000E+0000
                6+(-5*2) = -4.000E+0000
                6*-1 = -6.000E+0000
                1.2e5/2.1e5 = 5.714E-0001
                0.9999999999999999+1e-15 = 1.000E+0000
                2.1-1.1 = 1.000E+0000



16.8.4     A Tiny Assembler
                    Although the UCR Standard Library pattern matching routines would probably not
                be appropriate for writing a full lexical analyzer or compiler, they are useful for writing
                small compilers/assemblers or programs where speed of compilation/assembly is of little
                concern. One good example is the simple nonsymbolic assembler appearing in the
                SIM88610 simulator for an earlier version of the x86 processors11. This “mini-assembler”
                accepts an x86 assembly language statement and immediately assembles it into memory.
                This allows SIM886 users to create simple assembly language programs within the
                SIM886 monitor/debugger12. Using the Standard Library pattern matching routines
                makes it very easy to implement such an assembler.
                    The grammar for this miniassembler is
                Stmt →               Grp1   reg “,”   operand |
                                     Grp2   reg “,”   reg “,” constant |
                                     Grp3   operand   |
                                     goto   operand   |
                                     halt

                Grp1 →               load | store | add | sub
                Grp2 →               ifeq | iflt | ifgt
                Grp3 →               get | put

                reg →                ax | bx | cx | dx

                operand →            reg | constant | [bx] | constant [bx]

                constant →           hexdigit constant | hexdigit

                hexdigit →           0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | a | b |
                                     c | d | e | f

                There are some minor semantic details that the program handles (such as disallowing
                stores into immediate operands). The assembly code for the miniassembler follows:
                ; ASM.ASM
                ;

                                     .xlist
                                     include    stdlib.a
                                     matchfuncs
                                     includelib stdlib.lib
                                     .list


   10. SIM886 is an earlier version of SIMx86. It is also available on the Companion CD-ROM.
   11. The current x86 system is written with Borland’s Delphi, using a pattern matching library written for Pascal
   that is very similar to the Standard Library’s pattern matching code.
   12. See the lab manual for more details on SIM886.


                                                                                                         Page 953
Chapter 16


             dseg             segment   para public ‘data’

             ; Some sample statements to assemble:

             Str1             byte      “load ax, 0”,0
             Str2             byte      “load ax, bx”,0
             Str3             byte      “load ax, ax”,0
             Str4             byte      “add ax, 15”,0
             Str5             byte      “sub ax, [bx]”,0
             Str6             byte      “store bx, [1000]”,0
             Str7             byte      “load bx, 2000[bx]”,0
             Str8             byte      “goto 3000”,0
             Str9             byte      “iflt ax, bx, 100”,0
             Str10            byte      “halt”,0
             Str11            byte      “This is illegal”,0
             Str12            byte      “load ax, store”,0
             Str13            byte      “store ax, 1000”,0
             Str14            byte      “ifeq ax, 0, 0”,0

             ; Variables used by the assembler.

             AsmConst         word      0
             AsmOpcode        byte      0
             AsmOprnd1        byte      0
             AsmOprnd2        byte      0

                              include   stdsets.a    ;Bring in the standard char sets.

             ; Patterns for the assembler:

             ; Pattern is (
             ;       (load|store|add|sub) reg “,” operand |
             ;       (ifeq|iflt|ifgt) reg1 “,” reg2 “,” const |
             ;       (get|put) operand |
             ;       goto operand |
             ;       halt
             ;       )
             ;
             ; With a few semantic additions (e.g., cannot store to a const).

             InstrPat         pattern   {spancset, WhiteSpace,Grp1,Grp1}

             Grp1             pattern   {sl_Match2,Grp1Strs, Grp2 ,Grp1Oprnds}
             Grp1Strs         pattern   {TryLoad,,Grp1Store}
             Grp1Store        pattern   {TryStore,,Grp1Add}
             Grp1Add          pattern   {TryAdd,,Grp1Sub}
             Grp1Sub          pattern   {TrySub}

             ; Patterns for the LOAD, STORE, ADD, and SUB instructions.

             LoadPat          pattern   {MatchStr,LoadInstr2}
             LoadInstr2       byte      “LOAD”,0

             StorePat         pattern   {MatchStr,StoreInstr2}
             StoreInstr2      byte      “STORE”,0

             AddPat           pattern   {MatchStr,AddInstr2}
             AddInstr2        byte      “ADD”,0

             SubPat           pattern   {MatchStr,SubInstr2}
             SubInstr2        byte      “SUB”,0

             ; Patterns for the group one (LOAD/STORE/ADD/SUB) instruction operands:

             Grp1Oprnds       pattern   {spancset,WhiteSpace,Grp1reg,Grp1reg}
             Grp1Reg          pattern   {MatchReg,AsmOprnd1,,Grp1ws2}
             Grp1ws2          pattern   {spancset,WhiteSpace,Grp1Comma,Grp1Comma}
             Grp1Comma        pattern   {MatchChar,’,’,0,Grp1ws3}
             Grp1ws3          pattern   {spancset,WhiteSpace,Grp1Op2,Grp1Op2}


Page 954
                                                                   Control Structures

Grp1Op2            pattern   {MatchGen,,,EndOfLine}
EndOfLine          pattern   {spancset,WhiteSpace,NullChar,NullChar}
NullChar           pattern   {EOS}

Grp1Op2Reg         pattern   {MatchReg,AsmOprnd2}

; Patterns for the group two instructions (IFEQ, IFLT, IFGT):

Grp2               pattern   {sl_Match2,Grp2Strs, Grp3 ,Grp2Oprnds}
Grp2Strs           pattern   {TryIFEQ,,Grp2IFLT}
Grp2IFLT           pattern   {TryIFLT,,Grp2IFGT}
Grp2IFGT           pattern   {TryIFGT}

Grp2Oprnds         pattern   {spancset,WhiteSpace,Grp2reg,Grp2reg}
Grp2Reg            pattern   {MatchReg,AsmOprnd1,,Grp2ws2}
Grp2ws2            pattern   {spancset,WhiteSpace,Grp2Comma,Grp2Comma}
Grp2Comma          pattern   {MatchChar,’,’,0,Grp2ws3}
Grp2ws3            pattern   {spancset,WhiteSpace,Grp2Reg2,Grp2Reg2}
Grp2Reg2           pattern   {MatchReg,AsmOprnd2,,Grp2ws4}
Grp2ws4            pattern   {spancset,WhiteSpace,Grp2Comma2,Grp2Comma2}
Grp2Comma2         pattern   {MatchChar,’,’,0,Grp2ws5}
Grp2ws5            pattern   {spancset,WhiteSpace,Grp2Op3,Grp2Op3}
Grp2Op3            pattern   {ConstPat,,,EndOfLine}

; Patterns for the IFEQ, IFLT, and IFGT instructions.

IFEQPat            pattern   {MatchStr,IFEQInstr2}
IFEQInstr2         byte      “IFEQ”,0

IFLTPat            pattern   {MatchStr,IFLTInstr2}
IFLTInstr2         byte      “IFLT”,0

IFGTPat            pattern   {MatchStr,IFGTInstr2}
IFGTInstr2         byte      “IFGT”,0

; Grp3 Patterns:

Grp3               pattern   {sl_Match2,Grp3Strs, Grp4 ,Grp3Oprnds}
Grp3Strs           pattern   {TryGet,,Grp3Put}
Grp3Put            pattern   {TryPut,,Grp3GOTO}
Grp3Goto           pattern   {TryGOTO}

; Patterns for the GET and PUT instructions.

GetPat             pattern   {MatchStr,GetInstr2}
GetInstr2          byte      “GET”,0

PutPat             pattern   {MatchStr,PutInstr2}
PutInstr2          byte      “PUT”,0

GOTOPat            pattern   {MatchStr,GOTOInstr2}
GOTOInstr2         byte      “GOTO”,0

; Patterns for the group three (PUT/GET/GOTO) instruction operands:

Grp3Oprnds         pattern   {spancset,WhiteSpace,Grp3Op,Grp3Op}
Grp3Op             pattern   {MatchGen,,,EndOfLine}

; Patterns for the group four instruction (HALT).

Grp4               pattern   {TryHalt,,,EndOfLine}

HaltPat            pattern   {MatchStr,HaltInstr2}
HaltInstr2         byte      “HALT”,0

; Patterns to match the four non-register addressing modes:

BXIndrctPat        pattern   {MatchStr,BXIndrctStr}
BXIndrctStr        byte      “[BX]”,0



                                                                           Page 955
Chapter 16

             BXIndexedPat       pattern   {ConstPat,,,BXIndrctPat}

             DirectPat          pattern   {MatchChar,’[‘,,DP2}
             DP2                pattern   {ConstPat,,,DP3}
             DP3                pattern   {MatchChar,’]’}

             ImmediatePat       pattern   {ConstPat}

             ; Pattern to match a hex constant:

             HexConstPat        pattern   {Spancset, xdigits}

             dseg               ends

             cseg               segment   para public ‘code’
                                assume    cs:cseg, ds:dseg

             ; The store macro tweaks the DS register and stores into the
             ; specified variable in DSEG.

             store              macro     Where, What
                                push      ds
                                push      ax
                                mov       ax, seg Where
                                mov       ds, ax
                                mov       Where, What
                                pop       ax
                                pop       ds
                                endm

             ;   Pattern matching routines for the assembler.
             ;   Each mnemonic has its own corresponding matching function that
             ;   attempts to match the mnemonic. If it does, it initializes the
             ;   AsmOpcode variable with the base opcode of the instruction.

             ; Compare against the “LOAD” string.

             TryLoad            proc      far
                                push      dx
                                push      si
                                ldxi      LoadPat
                                match2
                                jnc       NoTLMatch

                                store     AsmOpcode, 0           ;Initialize base opcode.

             NoTLMatch:         pop       si
                                pop       dx
                                ret
             TryLoad            endp

             ; Compare against the “STORE” string.

             TryStore           proc      far
                                push      dx
                                push      si
                                ldxi      StorePat
                                match2
                                jnc       NoTSMatch
                                store     AsmOpcode, 1           ;Initialize base opcode.

             NoTSMatch:         pop       si
                                pop       dx
                                ret
             TryStore           endp

             ; Compare against the “ADD” string.

             TryAdd             proc      far
                                push      dx


Page 956
                                                      Control Structures

                 push     si
                 ldxi     AddPat
                 match2
                 jnc      NoTAMatch
                 store    AsmOpcode, 2   ;Initialize ADD opcode.

NoTAMatch:       pop      si
                 pop      dx
                 ret
TryAdd           endp

; Compare against the “SUB” string.

TrySub           proc     far
                 push     dx
                 push     si
                 ldxi     SubPat
                 match2
                 jnc      NoTMMatch
                 store    AsmOpcode, 3   ;Initialize SUB opcode.

NoTMMatch:       pop      si
                 pop      dx
                 ret
TrySub           endp

; Compare against the “IFEQ” string.

TryIFEQ          proc     far
                 push     dx
                 push     si
                 ldxi     IFEQPat
                 match2
                 jnc      NoIEMatch
                 store    AsmOpcode, 4   ;Initialize IFEQ opcode.

NoIEMatch:       pop      si
                 pop      dx
                 ret
TryIFEQ          endp

; Compare against the “IFLT” string.

TryIFLT          proc     far
                 push     dx
                 push     si
                 ldxi     IFLTPat
                 match2
                 jnc      NoILMatch
                 store    AsmOpcode, 5   ;Initialize IFLT opcode.

NoILMatch:       pop      si
                 pop      dx
                 ret
TryIFLT          endp

; Compare against the “IFGT” string.

TryIFGT          proc     far
                 push     dx
                 push     si
                 ldxi     IFGTPat
                 match2
                 jnc      NoIGMatch
                 store    AsmOpcode, 6   ;Initialize IFGT opcode.

NoIGMatch:       pop      si
                 pop      dx
                 ret
TryIFGT          endp


                                                              Page 957
Chapter 16


             ; Compare against the “GET” string.

             TryGET             proc     far
                                push     dx
                                push     si
                                ldxi     GetPat
                                match2
                                jnc      NoGMatch
                                store    AsmOpcode, 7            ;Initialize Special opcode.
                                store    AsmOprnd1, 2            ;GET’s Special opcode.

             NoGMatch:          pop      si
                                pop      dx
                                ret
             TryGET             endp

             ; Compare against the “PUT” string.

             TryPut             proc     far
                                push     dx
                                push     si
                                ldxi     PutPat
                                match2
                                jnc      NoPMatch
                                store    AsmOpcode, 7            ;Initialize Special opcode.
                                store    AsmOprnd1, 3            ;PUT’s Special opcode.

             NoPMatch:          pop      si
                                pop      dx
                                ret
             TryPUT             endp

             ; Compare against the “GOTO” string.

             TryGOTO            proc     far
                                push     dx
                                push     si
                                ldxi     GOTOPat
                                match2
                                jnc      NoGMatch
                                store    AsmOpcode, 7            ;Initialize Special opcode.
                                store    AsmOprnd1, 1            ;PUT’s Special opcode.

             NoGMatch:          pop      si
                                pop      dx
                                ret
             TryGOTO            endp

             ; Compare against the “HALT” string.

             TryHalt            proc     far
                                push     dx
                                push     si
                                ldxi     HaltPat
                                match2
                                jnc      NoHMatch
                                store    AsmOpcode, 7            ;Initialize Special opcode.
                                store    AsmOprnd1, 0            ;Halt’s special opcode.
                                store    AsmOprnd2, 0

             NoHMatch:          pop      si
                                pop      dx
                                ret
             TryHALT            endp

             ;   MatchReg checks to see if we’ve got a valid register value. On entry,
             ;   DS:SI points at the location to store the byte opcode (0, 1, 2, or 3) for
             ;   a reasonable register (AX, BX, CX, or DX); ES:DI points at the string
             ;   containing (hopefully) the register operand, and CX points at the last


Page 958
                                                                     Control Structures

; location plus one we can check in the string.
;
; On return, Carry=1 for success, 0 for failure. ES:AX must point beyond
; the characters which make up the register if we have a match.

MatchReg         proc       far

; ES:DI Points at two characters which should be AX/BX/CX/DX. Anything
; else is an error.

                 cmp        byte ptr   es:1[di], ‘X’          ;Everyone needs this
                 jne        BadReg
                 xor        ax, ax                            ;886 “AX” reg code.
                 cmp        byte ptr   es:[di], ‘A’           ;AX?
                 je         GoodReg
                 inc        ax
                 cmp        byte ptr   es:[di], ‘B’           ;BX?
                 je         GoodReg
                 inc        ax
                 cmp        byte ptr   es:[di], ‘C’           ;CX?
                 je         GoodReg
                 inc        ax
                 cmp        byte ptr   es:[di], ‘D’           ;DX?
                 je         GoodReg
BadReg:          clc
                 mov        ax, di
                 ret

GoodReg:
                 mov        ds:[si], al                ;Save register opcode.
                 lea        ax, 2[di]                  ;Skip past register.
                 cmp        ax, cx                     ;Be sure we didn’t go
                 ja         BadReg                     ; too far.
                 stc
                 ret
MatchReg         endp

; MatchGen-      Matches a general addressing mode. Stuffs the appropriate
;                addressing mode code into AsmOprnd2. If a 16-bit constant
;                is required by this addressing mode, this code shoves that
;                into the AsmConst variable.

MatchGen         proc       far
                 push       dx
                 push       si

; Try a register operand.

                 ldxi       Grp1Op2Reg
                 match2
                 jc         MGDone

; Try “[bx]”.

                 ldxi       BXIndrctPat
                 match2
                 jnc        TryBXIndexed
                 store      AsmOprnd2, 4
                 jmp        MGDone

; Look for an operand of the form “xxxx[bx]”.

TryBXIndexed:
                 ldxi       BXIndexedPat
                 match2
                 jnc        TryDirect
                 store      AsmOprnd2, 5
                 jmp        MGDone

; Try a direct address operand “[xxxx]”.


                                                                             Page 959
Chapter 16


             TryDirect:
                              ldxi     DirectPat
                              match2
                              jnc      TryImmediate
                              store    AsmOprnd2, 6
                              jmp      MGDone

             ; Look for an immediate operand “xxxx”.

             TryImmediate:
                              ldxi     ImmediatePat
                              match2
                              jnc      MGDone
                              store    AsmOprnd2, 7

             MGDone:
                              pop      si
                              pop      dx
                              ret
             MatchGen         endp

             ; ConstPat-      Matches a 16-bit hex constant. If it matches, it converts
             ;                the string to an integer and stores it into AsmConst.

             ConstPat         proc     far
                              push     dx
                              push     si
                              ldxi     HexConstPat
                              match2
                              jnc      CPDone

                              push     ds
                              push     ax
                              mov      ax, seg AsmConst
                              mov      ds, ax
                              atoh
                              mov      AsmConst, ax
                              pop      ax
                              pop      ds
                              stc

             CPDone:          pop      si
                              pop      dx
                              ret
             ConstPat         endp

             ; Assemble-      This code assembles the instruction that ES:DI points
             ;                at and displays the hex opcode(s) for that instruction.

             Assemble         proc     near

             ; Print out the instruction we’re about to assemble.

                              print
                              byte     “Assembling: “,0
                              strupr
                              puts
                              putcr

             ; Assemble the instruction:

                              ldxi     InstrPat
                              xor      cx, cx
                              match
                              jnc      SyntaxError

             ; Quick check for illegal instructions:

                              cmp      AsmOpcode, 7                   ;Special/Get instr.


Page 960
                                                                 Control Structures

                 jne      TryStoreInstr
                 cmp      AsmOprnd1, 2                     ;GET opcode
                 je       SeeIfImm
                 cmp      AsmOprnd1, 1                     ;Goto opcode
                 je       IsGOTO

TryStoreInstr:   cmp      AsmOpcode, 1                     ;Store Instruction
                 jne      InstrOkay

SeeIfImm:        cmp      AsmOprnd2, 7                     ;Immediate Adrs Mode
                 jne      InstrOkay
                 print
                 db       “Syntax error: store/get immediate not allowed.”
                 db       “ Try Again”,cr,lf,0
                 jmp      ASMDone

IsGOTO:          cmp      AsmOprnd2, 7            ;Immediate mode for GOTO
                 je       InstrOkay
                 print
                 db       “Syntax error: GOTO only allows immediate “
                 byte     “mode.”,cr,lf
                 db       0
                 jmp      ASMDone

; Merge the opcode and operand fields together in the instruction byte,
; then output the opcode byte.

InstrOkay:       mov      al,   AsmOpcode
                 shl      al,   1
                 shl      al,   1
                 or       al,   AsmOprnd1
                 shl      al,   1
                 shl      al,   1
                 shl      al,   1
                 or       al,   AsmOprnd2
                 puth
                 cmp      AsmOpcode, 4                     ;IFEQ instruction
                 jb       SimpleInstr
                 cmp      AsmOpcode, 6                     ;IFGT instruction
                 jbe      PutConstant

SimpleInstr:     cmp      AsmOprnd2, 5
                 jb ASMDone

; If this instruction has a 16 bit operand, output it here.

PutConstant:     mov      al, ‘ ‘
                 putc
                 mov      ax, ASMConst
                 puth
                 mov      al, ‘ ‘
                 putc
                 xchg     al, ah
                 puth
                 jmp      ASMDone

SyntaxError:     print
                 db       “Syntax error in instruction.”
                 db       cr,lf,0

ASMDone:         putcr
                 ret
Assemble         endp

; Main program that tests the assembler.

Main             proc
                 mov      ax, seg dseg ;Set up the segment registers
                 mov      ds, ax
                 mov      es, ax


                                                                          Page 961
Chapter 16

                              meminit

                              lesi      Str1
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str2
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str3
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str4
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str5
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str6
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str7
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str8
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str9
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str10
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str11
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str12
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str13
                              call      Assemble
                              lesi      Str14
                              call      Assemble

             Quit:            ExitPgm
             Main             endp
             cseg             ends

             sseg             segment   para stack ‘stack’
             stk              db        256 dup (“stack “)
             sseg             ends

             zzzzzzseg        segment   para public ‘zzzzzz’
             LastBytes        db        16 dup (?)
             zzzzzzseg        ends
                              end       Main



             Sample Output:
             Assembling: LOAD AX, 0
             07 00 00
             Assembling: LOAD AX, BX
             01
             Assembling: LOAD AX, AX
             00
             Assembling: ADD AX, 15
             47 15 00
             Assembling: SUB AX, [BX]
             64
             Assembling: STORE BX, [1000]
             2E 00 10
             Assembling: LOAD BX, 2000[BX]
             0D 00 20
             Assembling: GOTO 3000
             EF 00 30
             Assembling: IFLT AX, BX, 100
             A1 00 01
             Assembling: HALT
             E0
             Assembling: THIS IS ILLEGAL
             Syntax error in instruction.


Page 962
                                                                                                   Control Structures


                Assembling: LOAD AX, STORE
                Syntax error in instruction.

                Assembling: STORE AX, 1000
                Syntax error: store/get immediate not allowed. Try Again

                Assembling: IFEQ AX, 0, 0
                Syntax error in instruction.



16.8.5     The “MADVENTURE” Game
                    Computer games are a perfect example of programs that often use pattern matching.
                One class of computer games in general, the adventure game13, is a perfect example of
                games that use pattern matching. An adventure style game excepts English-like com-
                mands from the user, parses these commands, and acts upon them. In this section we will
                develop an adventure game shell. That is, it will be a reasonably functional adventure style
                game, capable of accepting and processing user commands. All you need do is supply a
                story line and a few additional details to develop a fully functioning adventure class
                game.
                     An adventure game usually consists of some sort of maze through which the player
                moves. The program processes commands like go north or go right to move the player
                through the maze. Each move can deposit the player in a new room of the game. Gener-
                ally, each room or area contains objects the player can interact with. This could be reward
                objects such as items of value or it could be an antagonistic object like a monster or enemy
                player.
                    Usually, an adventure game is a puzzle of some sort. The player finds clues and picks
                up useful object in one part of the maze to solve problems in other parts of the maze. For
                example, a player could pick up a key in one room that opens a chest in another; then the
                player could find an object in the chest that is useful elsewhere in the maze. The purpose
                of the game is to solve all the interlocking puzzles and maximize one’s score (however
                that is done). This text will not dwell upon the subtleties of game design; that is a subject
                for a different text. Instead, we’ll look at the tools and data structures required to imple-
                ment the game design.
                     The Madventure game’s use of pattern matching is quite different from the previous
                examples appearing in this chapter. In the examples up to this point, the matching rou-
                tines specifically checked the validity of an input string; Madventure does not do this.
                Instead, it uses the pattern matching routines to simply determine if certain key words
                appear on a line input by the user. The program handles the actual parsing (determining if
                the command is syntactically correct). To understand how the Madventure game does
                this, it would help if we took a look at how to play the Madventure game14.
                     The Madventure prompts the user to enter a command. Unlike the original adventure
                game that required commands like “GO NORTH” (with no other characters other than
                spaces as part of the command), Madventure allows you to write whole sentences and
                then it attempts to pick out the key words from those sentences. For example, Madventure
                accepts the “GO NORTH” command; however, it also accepts commands like “North is
                the direction I want to go” and “I want to go in the north direction.” Madventure doesn’t
                really care as long as it can find “GO” and “NORTH” somewhere on the command line.
                This is a little more flexible that the original Adventure game structure. Of course, this
                scheme isn’t infallible, it will treat commands like “I absolutely, positively, do NOT want
                to go anywhere near the north direction” as a “GO NORTH” command. Oh well, the user
                almost always types just “GO NORTH” anyway.


   13. These are called adventure games because the original program of the genre was called “Adventure.”
   14. One word of caution, no one is going to claim that Madventure is a great game. If it were, it would be sold, it
   wouldn’t appear in this text! So don’t expect too much from the design of the game itself.


                                                                                                            Page 963
Chapter 16

                    A Madventure command usually consists of a noun keyword and a verb keyword.
                The Madventure recognizes six verbs and fourteen nouns15. The verbs are
                verbs →              go | get | drop | inventory | quit | help

                The nouns are
                nouns →              north | south | east | west | lime | beer | card |
                                     sign | program | homework | money | form | coupon

                Obviously, Madventure does not allow all combinations of verbs and nouns. Indeed, the
                following patterns are the only legal ones:
                LegalCmds →          go direction | get item | drop item | inventory |
                                     quit | help

                direction →          north | south | east | west

                item →               lime | beer | card | sign | program | homework |
                                     money | form | coupon

                    However, the pattern does not enforce this grammar. It just locates a noun and a verb
                on the line and, if found, sets the noun and verb variables to appropriate values to denote
                the keywords it finds. By letting the main program handle the parsing, the program is
                somewhat more flexible.
                    There are two main patterns in the Madventure program: NounPat and VerbPat. These
                patterns match words (nouns or verbs) using a regular expression like the following:
                          (ARB* ‘ ‘ |   ε) word (‘ ‘ | EOS)
                This regular expression matches a word that appears at the beginning of a sentence, at the
                end of a sentence, anywhere in the middle of a sentence, or a sentence consisting of a sin-
                gle word. Madventure uses a macro (MatchNoun or MatchVerb) to create an expression for
                each noun and verb in the above expression.
                    To get an idea of how Madvent processes words, consider the following VerbPat pat-
                tern:
                VerbPat          pattern      {sl_match2, MatchGo}
                                 MatchVerb    MatchGO, MatchGet, “GO”, 1
                                 MatchVerb    MatchGet, MatchDrop, “GET”, 2
                                 MatchVerb    MatchDrop, MatchInv, “DROP”, 3
                                 MatchVerb    MatchInv, MatchQuit, “INVENTORY”, 4
                                 MatchVerb    MatchQuit, MatchHelp, “QUIT”, 5
                                 MatchVerb    MatchHelp, 0, “HELP”, 6

                The MatchVerb macro expects four parameters. The first is an arbitrary pattern name; the
                second is a link to the next pattern in the list; the third is the string to match, and the
                fourth is a number that the matching routines will store into the verb variable if that string
                matches (by default, the verb variable contains zero). It is very easy to add new verbs to
                this list. For example, if you wanted to allow “run” and “walk” as synonyms for the “go”
                verb, you would just add two patterns to this list:
                VerbPat          pattern          {sl_match2, MatchGo}
                                 MatchVerb    MatchGO, MatchGet, “GO”, 1
                                 MatchVerb    MatchGet, MatchDrop, “GET”, 2
                                 MatchVerb    MatchDrop, MatchInv, “DROP”, 3
                                 MatchVerb    MatchInv, MatchQuit, “INVENTORY”, 4
                                 MatchVerb    MatchQuit, MatchHelp, “QUIT”, 5
                                 MatchVerb    MatchHelp, MatchRun, “HELP”, 6
                                 MatchVerb    MatchRun, MatchWalk, “RUN”, 1
                                 MatchVerb    MatchWalk, 0, “WALK”, 1

                There are only two things to consider when adding new verbs: first, don’t forget that the
                next field of the last verb should contain zero; second, the current version of Madventure


    15. However, one beautiful thing about Madventure is that it is very easy to extend and add more nouns and
    verbs.


Page 964
                                                                               Control Structures

only allows up to seven verbs. If you want to add more you will need to make a slight
modification to the main program (more on that, later). Of course, if you only want to cre-
ate synonyms, as we’ve done here, you simply reuse existing verb values so there is no
need to modify the main program.
    When you call the match routine and pass it the address of the VerbPat pattern, it scans
through the input string looking for the first verb. If it finds that verb (“GO”) it sets the
verb variable to the corresponding verb value at the end of the pattern. If match cannot find
the first verb, it tries the second. If that fails, it tries the third, and so on. If match cannot
find any of the verbs in the input string, it does not modify the verb variable (which con-
tains zero). If there are two or more of the above verbs on the input line, match will locate
the first verb in the verb list above. This may not be the first verb appearing on the line. For
example, if you say “Let’s get the money and go north” the match routine will match the
“go” verb, not the “get” verb. By the same token, the NounPat pattern would match the
north noun, not the money noun. So this command would be identical to “GO NORTH.”
     The MatchNoun is almost identical to the MatchVerb macro; there is, however, one
difference – the MatchNoun macro has an extra parameter which is the name of the data
structure representing the given object (if there is one). Basically, all the nouns (in this ver-
sion of Madventure) except NORTH, SOUTH, EAST, and WEST have some sort of data
structure associated with them.
    The maze in Madventure consists of nine rooms defined by the data structure:
Room                 struct
north                word       ?
south                word       ?
west                 word       ?
east                 word       ?
ItemList             word       MaxWeight dup (?)
Description          word       ?
Room                 ends

The north, south, west, and east fields contain near pointers to other rooms. The program
uses the CurRoom variable to keep track of the player’s current position in the maze. When
the player issues a “GO” command of some sort, Madventure copies the appropriate
value from the north, south, west, or east field to the CurRoom variable, effectively changing
the room the user is in. If one of these pointers is NULL, then the user cannot move in that
direction.
    The direction pointers are independent of one another. If you issue the command “GO
NORTH” and then issue the command “GO SOUTH” upon arriving in the new room,
there is no guarantee that you will wind up in the original room. The south field of the sec-
ond room may not point at the room that led you there. Indeed, there are several cases in
the Madventure game where this occurs.
    The ItemList array contains a list of near pointers to objects that could be in the room.
In the current version of this game, the objects are all the nouns except north, south, east,
and west. The player can carry these objects from room to room (indeed, that is the major
purpose of this game). Up to MaxWeight objects can appear in the room (MaxWeight is an
assembly time constant that is currently four; so there are a maximum of four items in any
one given room). If an entry in the ItemList is non-NULL, then it is a pointer to an Item
object. There may be zero to MaxWeight objects in a room.
    The Description field contains a pointer to a zero terminated string that describes the
room. The program prints this string each time through the command loop to keep the
player oriented.
    The second major data type in Madventure is the Item structure. This structure takes
the form:




                                                                                        Page 965
Chapter 16

              Item                struct
              Value               word       ?
              Weight              word       ?
              Key                 word       ?
              ShortDesc           word       ?
              LongDesc            word       ?
              WinDesc             word       ?
              Item                ends

                   The Value field contains an integer value awarded to the player when the player drops
              this object in the appropriate room. This is how the user scores points.
                  The Weight field usually contains one or two and determines how much this object
              “weighs.” The user can only carry around MaxWeight units of weight at any one given
              time. Each time the user picks up an object, the weight of that object is added to the user’s
              total weight. When the user drops an object, Madventure subtracts the object’s weight
              from the total.
                  The Key field contains a pointer to a room associated with the object. When the user
              drops the object in the Key room, the user is awarded the points in the Value field and the
              object disappears from the game. If the user drops the object in some other room, the
              object stays in that room until the user picks it up again.
                   The ShortDesc, LongDesc, and WinDesc fields contain pointers to zero terminated
              strings. Madventure prints the ShortDesc string in response to an INVENTORY command.
              It prints the LongDesc string when describing a room’s contents. It prints the WinDesc
              string when the user drops the object in its Key room and the object disappears from the
              game.
                   The Madventure main program is deceptively simple. Most of the logic is hidden in
              the pattern matching routines and in the parsing routine. We’ve already discussed the pat-
              tern matching code; the only important thing to remember is that it initializes the noun
              and verb variables with a value uniquely identifying each noun and verb. The main pro-
              gram’s logic uses these two values as an index into a two dimensional table that takes the
              following form:



                            Table 65: Madventure Noun/Verb Table
                No Verb         GO          GET        DROP         Inven-        Quit        Help
                                                                     tory
    No Noun                                                         Inven-        Quit        Help
                                                                     tory
    North                      Do
                              North
    South                   Do South
    East                     Do East
    West                     Do West
    Lime                                   Get Item     Drop
                                                        Item
    Beer                                   Get Item     Drop
                                                        Item
    Card                                   Get Item     Drop
                                                        Item
    Sign                                   Get Item     Drop
                                                        Item
    Program                                Get Item     Drop
                                                        Item


Page 966
                                                                                            Control Structures

                            Table 65: Madventure Noun/Verb Table
                 No Verb        GO           GET         DROP         Inven-        Quit          Help
                                                                       tory
Home-                                     Get Item       Drop
work                                                     Item
Money                                     Get Item       Drop
                                                         Item
Form                                      Get Item       Drop
                                                         Item
Coupon                                    Get Item       Drop
                                                         Item

             The empty entries in this table correspond to illegal commands. The other entries are
             addresses of code within the main program that handles the given command.
                To add more nouns (objects) to the game, you need only extend the NounPat pattern
             and add additional rows to the table (of course, you may need to add code to handle the
             new objects if they are not easily handled by the routines above). To add new verbs you
             need only extended the VerbPat pattern and add new columns to this table16.
                 Other than the goodies mentioned above, the rest of the program utilizes techniques
             appearing throughout this and previous chapters. The only real surprising thing about
             this program is that you can implement a fairly complex program with so few lines of
             code. But such is the advantage of using pattern matching techniques in your assembly
             language programs.
             ; MADVENT.ASM
             ;
             ; This is a “shell” of an adventure game that you can use to create
             ; your own adventure style games.

                                  .xlist
                                  .286
                                  include    stdlib.a
                                  includelib stdlib.lib
                                  matchfuncs
                                  .list

             dseg                 segment         para public ‘data’

             ; Equates:

             NULL                 equ         0
             MaxWeight            equ         4               ;Max weight user can carry at one time.


             ;   The “ROOM” data structure defines a room, or area, where a player can
             ;   go. The NORTH, SOUTH, EAST, and WEST fields contain the address of
             ;   the rooms to the north, south, east, and west of the room. The game
             ;   transfers control to the room whose address appears in these fields
             ;   when the player supplies a GO NORTH, GO SOUTH, etc., command.
             ;
             ;   The ITEMLIST field contains a list of pointers to objects appearing
             ;   in this room. In this game, the user can pick up and drop these
             ;   objects (if there are any present).
             ;
             ;   The DESCRIPTION field contains a (near) address of a short description
             ;   of the current room/area.



16. Currently, the Madventure program computes the index into this table (a 14x8) table by shifting to the left
three bits rather than multiplying by eight. You will need to modify this code if you add more columns to the
table.


                                                                                                     Page 967
Chapter 16

             Room               struct
             north              word      ? ;Near pointers to other structures where
             south              word      ? ; we will wind up on the GO NORTH, GO SOUTH,
             west               word      ? ; etc., commands.
             east               word      ?

             ItemList           word      MaxWeight dup (?)

             Description        word      ? ;Description of room.
             Room               ends


             ;   The ITEM data structure describes the objects that may appear
             ;   within a room (in the ITEMLIST above). The VALUE field contains
             ;   the number of points this object is worth if the user drops it
             ;   off in the proper room (i.e, solves the puzzle). The WEIGHT
             ;   field provides the weight of this object. The user can only
             ;   carry four units of weight at a time. This field is usually
             ;   one, but may be more for larger objects. The KEY field is the
             ;   address of the room where this object must be dropped to solve
             ;   the problem. The SHORTDESC field is a pointer to a string that
             ;   the program prints when the user executes an INVENTORY command.
             ;   LONGDESC is a pointer to a string the program prints when des-
             ;   cribing the contents of a room. The WINDESC field is a pointer
             ;   to a string that the program prints when the user solves the
             ;   appropriate puzzle.

             Item               struct
             Value              word      ?
             Weight             word      ?
             Key                word      ?
             ShortDesc          word      ?
             LongDesc           word      ?
             WinDesc            word      ?
             Item               ends


             ; State variables for the player:

             CurRoom            word          Room1                 ;Room the player is in.
             ItemsOnHand        word          MaxWeight dup (?)     ;Items the player carries.
             CurWeight          word          0                     ;Weight of items carried.
             CurScore           word          15                    ;Player’s current score.
             TotalCounter       word          9                     ;Items left to place.
             Noun               word          0                     ;Current noun value.
             Verb               word          0                     ;Current verb value.
             NounPtr            word          0                     ;Ptr to current noun item.


             ; Input buffer for commands

             InputLine        byte      128 dup (?)
             ; The following macros generate a pattern which will match a single word
             ; which appears anywhere on a line. In particular, they match a word
             ; at the beginning of a line, somewhere in the middle of the line, or
             ; at the end of a line. This program defines a word as any sequence
             ; of character surrounded by spaces or the beginning or end of a line.
             ;
             ; MatchNoun/Verb matches lines defined by the regular expression:
             ;
             ;      (ARB* ‘ ‘ | ε) string (‘ ‘ | EOS)

             MatchNoun          macro         Name, next, WordString, ItemVal, ItemPtr
                                local         WS1, WS2, WS3, WS4
                                local         WS5, WS6, WordStr

             Name               Pattern       {sl_match2, WS1, next}
             WS1                Pattern       {MatchStr, WordStr, WS2, WS5}
             WS2                Pattern       {arb,0,0,WS3}
             WS3                Pattern       {Matchchar, ‘ ‘,0, WS4}


Page 968
                                                                   Control Structures

WS4              Pattern     {MatchStr, WordStr, 0, WS5}
WS5              Pattern     {SetNoun,ItemVal,0,WS6}
WS6              Pattern     {SetPtr, ItemPtr,0,MatchEOS}
WordStr          byte        WordString
                 byte        0
                 endm


MatchVerb        macro       Name, next, WordString, ItemVal
                 local       WS1, WS2, WS3, WS4
                 local       WS5, WordStr

Name             Pattern     {sl_match2, WS1, next}
WS1              Pattern     {MatchStr, WordStr, WS2, WS5}
WS2              Pattern     {arb,0,0,WS3}
WS3              Pattern     {Matchchar, ‘ ‘,0, WS4}
WS4              Pattern     {MatchStr, WordStr, 0, WS5}
WS5              Pattern     {SetVerb,ItemVal,0,MatchEOS}
WordStr          byte        WordString
                 byte        0
                 endm




; Generic patterns which most of the patterns use:

MatchEOS         Pattern     {EOS,0,MatchSpc}
MatchSpc         Pattern     {MatchChar,’ ‘}


; Here are the list of nouns allowed in this program.

NounPat          pattern     {sl_match2, MatchNorth}

                 MatchNoun   MatchNorth, MatchSouth, “NORTH”, 1, 0
                 MatchNoun   MatchSouth, MatchEast, “SOUTH”, 2, 0
                 MatchNoun   MatchEast, MatchWest, “EAST”, 3, 0
                 MatchNoun   MatchWest, MatchLime, “WEST”, 4, 0
                 MatchNoun   MatchLime, MatchBeer, “LIME”, 5, Item3
                 MatchNoun   MatchBeer, MatchCard, “BEER”, 6, Item9
                 MatchNoun   MatchCard, MatchSign, “CARD”, 7, Item2
                 MatchNoun   MatchSign, MatchPgm, “SIGN”, 8, Item1
                 MatchNoun   MatchPgm, MatchHW, “PROGRAM”, 9, Item7
                 MatchNoun   MatchHW, MatchMoney, “HOMEWORK”, 10, Item4
                 MatchNoun   MatchMoney, MatchForm, “MONEY”, 11, Item5
                 MatchNoun   MatchForm, MatchCoupon, “FORM”, 12, Item6
                 MatchNoun   MatchCoupon, 0, “COUPON”, 13, Item8


; Here is the list of allowable verbs.

VerbPat          pattern     {sl_match2, MatchGo}

                 MatchVerb   MatchGO, MatchGet, “GO”, 1
                 MatchVerb   MatchGet, MatchDrop, “GET”, 2
                 MatchVerb   MatchDrop, MatchInv, “DROP”, 3
                 MatchVerb   MatchInv, MatchQuit, “INVENTORY”, 4
                 MatchVerb   MatchQuit, MatchHelp, “QUIT”, 5
                 MatchVerb   MatchHelp, 0, “HELP”, 6

; Data structures for the “maze”.

Room1            room        {Room1, Room5, Room4, Room2,
                              {Item1,0,0,0},
                              Room1Desc}

Room1Desc        byte        “at the Commons”,0

Item1            item        {10,2,Room3,GS1,GS2,GS3}


                                                                           Page 969
Chapter 16

             GS1         byte   “a big sign”,0
             GS2         byte   “a big sign made of styrofoam with funny “
                         byte   “letters on it.”,0
             GS3         byte   “The ETA PI Fraternity thanks you for return”
                         byte   “ing their sign, they”,cr,lf
                         byte   “make you an honorary life member, as long as “
                         byte   “you continue to pay”,cr,lf
                         byte   “your $30 monthly dues, that is.”,0

             Room2       room   {NULL, Room5, Room1, Room3,
                                 {Item2,0,0,0},
                                 Room2Desc}

             Room2Desc   byte   ‘at the “C” on the hill above campus’,0

             Item2       item   {10,1,Room1,LC1,LC2,LC3}
             LC1         byte   “a lunch card”,0
             LC2         byte   “a lunch card which someone must have “
                         byte   “accidentally dropped here.”, 0
             LC3         byte   “You get a big meal at the Commons cafeteria”
                         byte   cr,lf
                         byte   “It would be a good idea to go visit the “
                         byte   “student health center”,cr,lf
                         byte   “at this time.”,0

             Room3       room   {NULL, Room6, Room2, Room2,
                                 {Item3,0,0,0},
                                 Room3Desc}

             Room3Desc   byte   “at ETA PI Frat House”,0

             Item3       item   {10,2,Room2,BL1,BL2,BL3}
             BL1         byte   “a bag of lime”,0
             BL2         byte   “a bag of baseball field lime which someone “
                         byte   “is obviously saving for”,cr,lf
                         byte   “a special occasion.”,0
             BL3         byte   “You spread the lime out forming a big ‘++’ “
                         byte   “after the ‘C’”,cr,lf
                         byte   “Your friends in Computer Science hold you “
                         byte   “in total awe.”,0

             Room4       room   {Room1, Room7, Room7, Room5,
                                 {Item4,0,0,0},
                                 Room4Desc}

             Room4Desc   byte   “in Dr. John Smith’s Office”,0

             Item4       item   {10,1,Room7,HW1,HW2,HW3}
             HW1         byte   “a homework assignment”,0
             HW2         byte   “a homework assignment which appears to “
                         byte   “to contain assembly language”,0
             HW3         byte   “The grader notes that your homework “
                         byte   “assignment looks quite”,cr,lf
                         byte   “similar to someone else’s assignment “
                         byte   “in the class and reports you”,cr,lf
                         byte   “to the instructor.”,0

             Room5       room   {Room1, Room9, Room7, Room2,
                                 {Item5,0,0,0},
                                 Room5Desc}

             Room5Desc   byte    “in the computer lab”,0

             Item5       item   {10,1,Room9,M1,M2,M3}
             M1          byte   “some money”,0
             M2          byte   “several dollars in an envelope in the “
                         byte   “trashcan”,0
             M3          byte   “The waitress thanks you for your “
                         byte   “generous tip and gets you”,cr,lf
                         byte   “another pitcher of beer. “


Page 970
                                                         Control Structures

            byte   “Then she asks for your ID.”,cr,lf
            byte   “You are at least 21 aren’t you?”,0

Room6       room   {Room3, Room9, Room5, NULL,
                    {Item6,0,0,0},
                    Room6Desc}

Room6Desc   byte   “at the campus book store”,0

Item6       item   {10,1,Room8,AD1,AD2,AD3}
AD1         byte   “an add/drop/change form”,0
AD2         byte   “an add/drop/change form filled out for “
            byte   “assembly to get a letter grade”,0
AD3         byte   “You got the form in just in time. “
            byte   “It would have been a shame to”,cr,lf
            byte   “have had to retake assembly because “
            byte   “you didn’t realize you needed to “,cr,lf
            byte   “get a letter grade in the course.”,0

Room7       room   {Room1, Room7, Room4, Room8,
                    {Item7,0,0,0},
                    Room7Desc}

Room7Desc   byte    “in the assembly lecture”,0

Item7       item   {10,1,Room5,AP1,AP2,AP3}
AP1         byte   “an assembly language program”,0
AP2         byte   “an assembly language program due in “
            byte   “the assemblylanguage class.”,0
AP3         byte   “The sample program the instructor gave “
            byte   “you provided all the information”,cr,lf
            byte   “you needed to complete your assignment. “
            byte   “You finish your work and”,cr,lf
            byte   “head to the local pub to celebrate.”
            byte   cr,lf,0

Room8       room   {Room5, Room6, Room7, Room9,
                    {Item8,0,0,0},
                    Room8Desc}

Room8Desc   byte    “at the Registrar’s office”,0

Item8       item   {10,1,Room6,C1,C2,C3}
C1          byte   “a coupon”,0
C2          byte   “a coupon good for a free text book”,0
C3          byte   ‘You get a free copy of “Cliff Notes for ‘
            byte   ‘The Art of Assembly’,cr,lf
            byte   ‘Language Programming” Alas, it does not ‘
            byte   “provide all the”,cr,lf
            byte   “information you need for the class, so you “
            byte   “sell it back during”,cr,lf
            byte   “the book buy-back period.”,0



Room9       room   {Room6, Room9, Room8, Room3,
                    {Item9,0,0,0},
                    Room9Desc}

Room9Desc   byte   “at The Pub”,0
Item9       item   {10,2,Room4,B1,B2,B3}
B1          byte   “a pitcher of beer”,0
B2          byte   “an ice cold pitcher of imported beer”,0
B3          byte   “Dr. Smith thanks you profusely for your “
            byte   “good taste in brews.”,cr,lf
            byte   “He then invites you to the pub for a “
            byte   “round of pool and”,cr,lf
            byte   “some heavy duty hob-nobbing, “
            byte   “CS Department style.”,0



                                                                 Page 971
Chapter 16

             dseg               ends


             cseg               segment        para public ‘code’
                                assume         ds:dseg


             ; SetNoun-         Copies the value in SI (the matchparm parameter) to the
             ;                  NOUN variable.

             SetNoun            proc      far
                                push      ds
                                mov       ax, dseg
                                mov       ds, ax
                                mov       Noun, si
                                mov       ax, di
                                stc
                                pop       ds
                                ret
             SetNoun            endp


             ; SetVerb-         Copies the value in SI (the matchparm parameter) to the
             ;                  VERB variable.

             SetVerb            proc      far
                                push      ds
                                mov       ax, dseg
                                mov       ds, ax
                                mov       Verb, si
                                mov       ax, di
                                stc
                                pop       ds
                                ret
             SetVerb            endp

             ; SetPtr-          Copies the value in SI (the matchparm parameter) to the
             ;                  NOUNPTR variable.

             SetPtr             proc      far
                                push      ds
                                mov       ax, dseg
                                mov       ds, ax
                                mov       NounPtr, si
                                mov       ax, di
                                stc
                                pop       ds
                                ret
             SetPtr             endp

             ; CheckPresence-
             ;                BX points at an item. DI points at an item list. This
             ;                routine checks to see if that item is present in the
             ;                item list. Returns Carry set if item was found,
             ;                clear if not found.

             CheckPresence      proc

             ;   MaxWeight is an assembly-time adjustable constant that determines
             ;   how many objects the user can carry, or can be in a room, at one
             ;   time. The following repeat macro emits “MaxWeight” compare and
             ;   branch sequences to test each item pointed at by DS:DI.

             ItemCnt            =         0
                                repeat    MaxWeight
                                cmp       bx, [di+ItemCnt]
                                je        GotIt

             ItemCnt            =         ItemCnt+2
                                endm


Page 972
                                                                Control Structures


                 clc
                 ret

GotIt:           stc
                 ret
CheckPresence    endp

; RemoveItem-    BX contains a pointer to an item. DI contains a pointer
;                to an item list which contains that item. This routine
;                searches the item list and removes that item from the
;                list. To remove an item from the list, we need only
;                store a zero (NULL) over the top of its pointer entry
;                in the list.

RemoveItem       proc

; Once again, we use the repeat macro to automatically generate a chain
; of compare, branch, and remove code sequences for each possible item
; in the list.

ItemCnt          =        0
                 repeat   MaxWeight
                 local    NotThisOne
                 cmp      bx, [di+ItemCnt]
                 jne      NotThisOne
                 mov      word ptr [di+ItemCnt], NULL
                 ret
NotThisOne:
ItemCnt          =        ItemCnt+2
                 endm

                 ret
RemoveItem       endp


; InsertItem-    BX contains a pointer to an item, DI contains a pointer to
;                and item list. This routine searches through the list for
;                the first empty spot and copies the value in BX to that point.
;                It returns the carry set if it succeeds. It returns the
;                carry clear if there are no empty spots available.

InsertItem       proc

ItemCnt          =        0
                 repeat   MaxWeight
                 local    NotThisOne
                 cmp      word ptr [di+ItemCnt], 0
                 jne      NotThisOne
                 mov      [di+ItemCnt], bx
                 stc
                 ret
NotThisOne:
ItemCnt          =        ItemCnt+2
                 endm

                 clc
                 ret
InsertItem       endp

; LongDesc- Long description of an item.
; DI points at an item - print the long description of it.

LongDesc         proc
                 push     di
                 test     di, di
                 jz       NoDescription
                 mov      di, [di].item.LongDesc
                 puts
                 putcr


                                                                          Page 973
Chapter 16

             NoDescription:   pop       di
                              ret
             LongDesc         endp


             ; ShortDesc- Print the short description of an object.
             ; DI points at an item (possibly NULL). Print the short description for it.

             ShortDesc        proc
                              push      di
                              test      di, di
                              jz        NoDescription
                              mov       di, [di].item.ShortDesc
                              puts
                              putcr
             NoDescription:   pop       di
                              ret
             ShortDesc        endp

             ; Describe:      “CurRoom” points at the current room. Describe it and its
             ;                contents.

             Describe         proc
                              push      es
                              push      bx
                              push      di
                              mov       di, ds
                              mov       es, di

                              mov       bx, CurRoom
                              mov       di, [bx].room.Description
                              print
                              byte      “You are currently “,0
                              puts
                              putcr
                              print
                              byte      “Here you find the following:”,cr,lf,0

             ; For each possible item in the room, print out the long description
             ; of that item. The repeat macro generates a code sequence for each
             ; possible item that could be in this room.

             ItemCnt          =         0
                              repeat    MaxWeight
                              mov       di, [bx].room.ItemList[ItemCnt]
                              call      LongDesc

             ItemCnt          =         ItemCnt+2
                              endm


                              pop       di
                              pop       bx
                              pop       es
                              ret
             Describe         endp


             ; Here is the main program, that actually plays the game.

             Main             proc
                              mov       ax, dseg
                              mov       ds, ax
                              mov       es, ax
                              meminit

                              print
                              byte      cr,lf,lf,lf,lf,lf
                              byte      “Welcome to “,’”MADVENTURE”’,cr,lf
                              byte      ‘If you need help, type the command “HELP”’


Page 974
                                                                   Control Structures

                   byte     cr,lf,0

RoomLoop:          dec      CurScore     ;One point for each move.
                   jnz      NotOverYet

; If they made too many moves without dropping anything properly, boot them
; out of the game.

                   print
                   byte     “WHOA! You lost! You get to join the legions of “
                   byte     “the totally lame”,cr,lf
                   byte     ‘who have failed at “MADVENTURE”’,cr,lf,0
                   jmp      Quit

; Okay, tell ‘em where they are and get a new command from them.

NotOverYet:        putcr
                   call     Describe
                   print
                   byte     cr,lf
                   byte     “Command: “,0
                   lesi     InputLine
                   gets
                   strupr                ;Ignore case by converting to U.C.

;   Okay, process the command. Note that we don’t actually check to see
;   if there is a properly formed sentence. Instead, we just look to see
;   if any important keywords are on the line. If they are, the pattern
;   matching routines load the appropriate values into the noun and verb
;   variables (nouns: north=1, south=2, east=3, west=4, lime=5, beer=6,
;   card=7, sign=8, program=9, homework=10, money=11, form=12, coupon=13;
;   verbs: go=1, get=2, drop=3, inventory=4, quit=5, help=6).
;
;   This code uses the noun and verb variables as indexes into a two
;   dimensional array whose elements contain the address of the code
;   to process the given command. If a given command does not make
;   any sense (e.g., “go coupon”) the entry in the table points at the
;   bad command code.

                   mov      Noun, 0
                   mov      Verb, 0
                   mov      NounPtr, 0

                   ldxi     VerbPat
                   xor      cx, cx
                   match

                   lesi     InputLine
                   ldxi     NounPat
                   xor      cx, cx
                   match

;   Okay, index into the command table and jump to the appropriate
;   handler. Note that we will cheat and use a 14x8 array. There
;   are really only seven verbs, not eight. But using eight makes
;   things easier since it is easier to multiply by eight than seven.

                   mov      si, CurRoom;The commands expect this here.

                   mov      bx, Noun
                   shl      bx, 3        ;Multiply by eight.
                   add      bx, Verb
                   shl      bx, 1        ;Multiply by two - word table.
                   jmp      cseg:jmptbl[bx]

; The following table contains the noun x verb cross product.
; The verb values (in each row) are the following:
;
;      NONE      GO        GET DROP    INVNTRY     QUIT  HELP        unused
;       0         1         2 3         4           5     6           7


                                                                              Page 975
Chapter 16

             ;
             ; There is one row for each noun (plus row zero, corresponding to no
             ; noun found on line).

             jmptbl             word     Bad           ;No noun,   no verb
                                word     Bad           ;No noun,   GO
                                word     Bad           ;No noun,   GET
                                word     Bad           ;No noun,   DROP
                                word     DoInventory   ;No noun,   INVENTORY
                                word     QuitGame      ;No noun,   QUIT
                                word     DoHelp        ;No noun,   HELP
                                word     Bad           ;N/A

             NorthCmds          word     Bad,   GoNorth, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad
             SouthCmds          word     Bad,   GoSouth, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad
             EastCmds           word     Bad,   GoEast, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad
             WestCmds           word     Bad,   GoWest, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad, Bad
             LimeCmds           word     Bad,   Bad, GetItem, DropItem, Bad, Bad, Bad,   Bad
             BeerCmds           word     Bad,   Bad, GetItem, DropItem, Bad, Bad, Bad,   Bad
             CardCmds           word     Bad,   Bad, GetItem, DropItem, Bad, Bad, Bad,   Bad
             SignCmds           word     Bad,   Bad, GetItem, DropItem, Bad, Bad, Bad,   Bad
             ProgramCmds        word     Bad,   Bad, GetItem, DropItem, Bad, Bad, Bad,   Bad
             HomeworkCmds       word     Bad,   Bad, GetItem, DropItem, Bad, Bad, Bad,   Bad
             MoneyCmds          word     Bad,   Bad, GetItem, DropItem, Bad, Bad, Bad,   Bad
             FormCmds           word     Bad,   Bad, GetItem, DropItem, Bad, Bad, Bad,   Bad
             CouponCmds         word     Bad,   Bad, GetItem, DropItem, Bad, Bad, Bad,   Bad

             ; If the user enters a command we don’t know how to process, print an
             ; appropriate error message down here.

             Bad:               printf
                                byte     “I’m sorry, I don’t understand how to ‘%s’\n”,0
                                dword    InputLine
                                jmp      NotOverYet


             ;   Handle the movement commands here.
             ;   Movements are easy, all we’ve got to do is fetch the NORTH, SOUTH,
             ;   EAST, or WEST pointer from the current room’s data structure and
             ;   set the current room to that address. The only catch is that some
             ;   moves are not legal. Such moves have a NULL (zero) in the direction
             ;   field. A quick check for this case handles illegal moves.

             GoNorth:           mov      si, [si].room.North
                                jmp      MoveMe

             GoSouth:           mov      si, [si].room.South
                                jmp      MoveMe

             GoEast:            mov      si, [si].room.East
                                jmp      MoveMe

             GoWest:            mov      si, [si].room.West
             MoveMe:            test     si, si                    ;See if move allowed.
                                jnz      SetCurRoom
                                printf
                                byte     “Sorry, you cannot go in this direction.”
                                byte     cr, lf, 0
                                jmp      RoomLoop

             SetCurRoom:        mov      CurRoom, si   ;Move to new room.
                                jmp      RoomLoop

             ;   Handle the GetItem command down here. At this time the user
             ;   has entered GET and some noun that the player can pick up.
             ;   First, we will make sure that item is in this room.
             ;   Then we will check to make sure that picking up this object
             ;   won’t overload the player. If these two conditions are met,
             ;   we’ll transfer the object from the room to the player.



Page 976
                                                                  Control Structures

GetItem:         mov      bx, NounPtr ;Ptr to item user wants.
                 mov      si, CurRoom
                 lea      di, [si].room.ItemList;Ptr to item list in di.
                 call     CheckPresence;See if in room.
                 jc       GotTheItem
                 printf
                 byte     “Sorry, that item is not available here.”
                 byte     cr, lf, 0
                 jmp      RoomLoop

; Okay, see if picking up this object will overload the player.

GotTheItem:      mov      ax, [bx].Item.Weight
                 add      ax, CurWeight
                 cmp      ax, MaxWeight
                 jbe      WeightOkay
                 printf
                 byte     “Sorry, you are already carrying too many items “
                 byte     “to safely carry\nthat object\n”,0
                 jmp      RoomLoop

; Okay, everything’s cool, transfer the object from the room to the user.

WeightOkay:      mov      CurWeight, ax;Save new weight.
                 call     RemoveItem   ;Remove item from room.
                 lea      di, ItemsOnHand;Ptr to player’s list.
                 call     InsertItem
                 jmp      RoomLoop


; Handle dropped objects down here.

DropItem:        lea      di, ItemsOnHand;See if the user has
                 mov      bx, NounPtr ; this item on hand.
                 call     CheckPresence
                 jc       CanDropIt1
                 printf
                 byte     “You are not currently holding that item\n”,0
                 jmp      RoomLoop

; Okay, let’s see if this is the magic room where this item is
; supposed to be dropped. If so, award the user some points for
; properly figuring this out.

CanDropIt1:      mov      ax, [bx].item.key
                 cmp      ax, CurRoom
                 jne      JustDropIt

; Okay, success! Print the winning message for this object.

                 mov      di, [bx].item.WinDesc
                 puts
                 putcr

; Award the user some points.

                 mov      ax, [bx].item.value
                 add      CurScore, ax

; Since the user dropped it, they can carry more things now.

                 mov      ax, [bx].item.Weight
                 sub      CurWeight, ax

; Okay, take this from the user’s list.

                 lea      di, ItemsOnHand
                 call     RemoveItem

; Keep track of how may objects the user has successfully dropped.


                                                                          Page 977
Chapter 16

             ; When this counter hits zero, the game is over.

                              dec      TotalCounter
                              jnz      RoomLoop

                              printf
                              byte     “Well, you’ve found where everything goes “
                              byte     “and your score is %d.\n”
                              byte     “You might want to play again and see if “
                              byte     “you can get a better score.\n”,0
                              dword    CurScore
                              jmp      Quit

             ; If this isn’t the room where this object belongs, just drop the thing
             ; off. If this object won’t fit in this room, ignore the drop command.

             JustDropIt:      mov      di, CurRoom
                              lea      di, [di].room.ItemList
                              call     InsertItem
                              jc       DroppedItem
                              printf
                              byte     “There is insufficient room to leave “
                              byte     “that item here.\n”,0
                              jmp      RoomLoop

             ; If they can drop it, do so. Don’t forget we’ve just unburdened the
             ; user so we need to deduct the weight of this object from what the
             ; user is currently carrying.

             DroppedItem:     lea      di, ItemsOnHand
                              call     RemoveItem
                              mov      ax, [bx].item.Weight
                              sub      CurWeight, ax
                              jmp      RoomLoop

             ; If the user enters the INVENTORY command, print out the objects on hand

             DoInventory:     printf
                              byte     “You currently have the following items in your “
                              byte     “possession:”,cr,lf,0
                              mov      di, ItemsOnHand[0]
                              call     ShortDesc
                              mov      di, ItemsOnHand[2]
                              call     ShortDesc
                              mov      di, ItemsOnHand[4]
                              call     ShortDesc
                              mov      di, ItemsOnHand[6]
                              call     ShortDesc
                              printf
                              byte     “\nCurrent score: %d\n”
                              byte     “Carrying ability: %d/4\n\n”,0
                              dword    CurScore,CurWeight
                              inc      CurScore     ;This command is free.
                              jmp      RoomLoop


             ; If the user requests help, provide it here.

             DoHelp:          printf
                              byte     “List of commands:”,cr,lf,lf
                              byte     “GO {NORTH, EAST, WEST, SOUTH}”,cr,lf
                              byte     “{GET, DROP} {LIME, BEER, CARD, SIGN, PROGRAM, “
                              byte     “HOMEWORK, MONEY, FORM, COUPON}”,cr,lf
                              byte     “SHOW INVENTORY”,cr,lf
                              byte     “QUIT GAME”,cr,lf
                              byte     “HELP ME”,cr,lf,lf
                              byte     “Each command costs you one point.”,cr,lf
                              byte     “You accumulate points by picking up objects and “
                              byte     “dropping them in their”,cr,lf
                              byte     “ appropriate locations.”,cr,lf


Page 978
                                                                                        Control Structures

                                 byte       “If you drop an item in its proper location, it “
                                 byte       “disappears from the game.”,cr,lf
                                 byte       “The game is over if your score drops to zero or “
                                 byte       “you properly place”,cr,lf
                                 byte       “ all items.”,cr,lf
                                 byte       0
                                 jmp        RoomLoop


              ; If they quit prematurely, let ‘em know what a wimp they are!

              QuitGame:          printf
                                 byte       “So long, your score is %d and there are “
                                 byte       “still %d objects unplaced\n”,0
                                 dword      CurScore, TotalCounter

              Quit:              ExitPgm                   ;DOS macro to quit program.
              Main               endp
              cseg               ends

              sseg               segment    para stack ‘stack’
              stk                db         1024 dup (“stack “)
              sseg               ends

              zzzzzzseg          segment    para public ‘zzzzzz’
              LastBytes          db         16 dup (?)
              zzzzzzseg          ends
                                 end        Main



16.9     Laboratory Exercises
                  Programming with the Standard Library Pattern Matching routines doubles the com-
              plexity. Not only must you deal with the complexities of 80x86 assembly language, you
              must also deal with the complexities of the pattern matching paradigm, a programming
              language in its own right. While you can use a program like CodeView to track down
              problems in an assembly language program, no such debugger exists for “programs” you
              write with the Standard Library’s pattern matching “language.” Although the pattern
              matching routines are written in assembly language, attempting to trace through a pattern
              using CodeView will not be very enlightening. In this laboratory exercise, you will learn
              how to develop some rudimentary tools to help debug pattern matching programs.



16.9.1     Checking for Stack Overflow (Infinite Loops)
                  One common problem in pattern matching programs is the possibility of an infinite
              loop occurring in the pattern. This might occur, for example, if you have a left recursive
              production. Unfortunately, tracking down such loops in a pattern is very tedious, even
              with the help of a debugger like CodeView. Fortunately, there is a very simple change you
              can make to a program that uses patterns that will abort the program an warn you if infi-
              nite recursion exists.
                  Infinite recursion in a pattern occurs when sl_Match2 continuously calls itself without
              ever returning. This overflows the stack and causes the program to crash. There is a very
              easy change you can make to your programs to check for stack overflow:
              •       In patterns where you would normally call sl_Match2, call MatchPat instead.
              •       Include the following statements near the beginning of your program (before any
                      patterns):

              DEBUG              =          0              ;Define for debugging.

                                 ifdef      DEBUG


                                                                                                Page 979
Chapter 16

                 MatchPat             textequ     <MatchSP>
                                      else
                 MatchPat             textequ     <sl_Match2>
                                      endif

                           If you define the DEBUG symbol, your patterns will call the MatchSP pro-
                           cedure, otherwise they will call the sl_Match2 procedure. During testing,
                           define the DEBUG symbol.
                 •         Insert the following procedure somewhere in your program:

                 MatchSP              proc      far
                                      cmp        sp, offset StkOvrfl
                                      jbe        AbortPgm
                                      jmp        sl_Match2

                 AbortPgm:            print
                                      byte    cr,lf,lf
                                      byte     "Error: Stack overflow in MatchSP routine.",cr,lf,0
                                      ExitPgm
                 MatchSP              endp

                           This code sandwiches itself between your pattern and the sl_Match2 rou-
                           tine. It checks the stack pointer (sp) to see if it has dropped below a mini-
                           mally acceptable point in the stack segment. If not, it continues execution
                           by jumping to the sl_Match2 routine; otherwise it aborts program execu-
                           tion with an error message.
                 •         The final change to your program is to modify the stack segment so that it looks
                           like the following:

                 sseg                 segment     para stack 'stack'
                                      word        64 dup (?)                    ;Buffer for stack overflow
                 StkOvrfl             word        ?                             ;Stack overflow if drops
                 stk                  db          1024 dup ("stack   ")         ; below StkOvrfl.
                 sseg                 ends

                     After making these changes, your program will automatically stop with an error mes-
                 sage if infinite recursion occurs since infinite recursion will most certainly cause a stack
                 overflow17.
                     The following code (Ex16_1a.asm on the companion CD-ROM) presents a simple cal-
                 culator, similar to the calculator in the section “Evaluating Arithmetic Expressions” on
                 page 948, although this calculator only supports addition. As noted in the comments
                 appearing in this program, the pattern for the expression parser has a serious flaw – it
                 uses a left recursive production. This will most certainly cause an infinite loop and a stack
                 overflow. For your lab report: Run this program with and without the DEBUG symbol
                 defined (i.e., comment out the definition for one run). Describe what happens.
                 ;   EX16_1a.asm
                 ;
                 ;   A simple floating point calculator that demonstrates the use of the
                 ;   UCR Standard Library pattern matching routines. Note that this
                 ;   program requires an FPU.

                                      .xlist
                                      .386
                                      .387
                                      option     segment:use16
                                      include    stdlib.a
                                      includelib stdlib.lib
                                      matchfuncs
                                      .list


    17. This code will also abort your program if you use too much stack space without infinite recursion. A problem
    in its own right.


Page 980
                                                                     Control Structures


; If the symbol "DEBUG" is defined, then call the MatchSP routine
; to do stack overflow checking. If "DEBUG" is not defined, just
; call the sl_Match2 routine directly.

DEBUG               =         0             ;Define for debugging.

                    ifdef     DEBUG
MatchPat            textequ   <MatchSP>
                    else
MatchPat            textequ   <sl_Match2>
                    endif

dseg                segment   para public 'data'

; The following is a temporary used when converting a floating point
; string to a 64 bit real value.

CurValue            real8     0.0

; A Test String:

TestStr             byte      "5+2-(3-1)",0

;   Grammar for simple infix -> postfix translation operation:
;   Semantic rules appear in braces.
;
;   NOTE: This code has a serious problem. The first production
;   is left recursive and will generate an infinite loop.
;
;   E -> E+T {print result} | T {print result}
;   T -> <constant> {fld constant} | (E)
;
;
;   UCR Standard Library Pattern that handles the grammar above:

; An expression consists of an "E" item followed by the end of the string:

Expression          pattern   {MatchPat,E,,EndOfString}
EndOfString         pattern   {EOS}


; An "E" item consists of an "E" item optionally followed by "+" or "-"
; and a "T" item (E -> E+T | T):

E                   pattern   {MatchPat, E,T,Eplus}
Eplus               pattern   {MatchChar, '+', T, epPlus}
epPlus              pattern   {DoFadd}


;   A "T" item is either a floating point constant or "(" followed by
;   an "E" item followed by ")".
;
;   The regular expression for a floating point constant is
;
;         [0-9]+ ( "." [0-9]* | ) ( ((e|E) (+|-| ) [0-9]+) | )
;
;   Note: the pattern "Const" matches exactly the characters specified
;        by the above regular expression. It is the pattern the calc-
;        ulator grabs when converting a string to a floating point number.


Const               pattern   {MatchPat, ConstStr, 0, FLDConst}
ConstStr            pattern   {MatchPat, DoDigits, 0, Const2}
Const2              pattern   {matchchar, '.', Const4, Const3}
Const3              pattern   {MatchPat, DoDigits, Const4, Const4}
Const4              pattern   {matchchar, 'e', const5, const6}
Const5              pattern   {matchchar, 'E', Succeed, const6}
Const6              pattern   {matchchar, '+', const7, const8}
Const7              pattern   {matchchar, '-', const8, const8}


                                                                             Page 981
Chapter 16

             Const8             pattern    {MatchPat, DoDigits}

             FldConst           pattern    {PushValue}

             ; DoDigits handles the regular expression [0-9]+

             DoDigits           pattern    {Anycset, Digits, 0, SpanDigits}
             SpanDigits         pattern    {Spancset, Digits}

             ; The S production handles constants or an expression in parentheses.

             T                  pattern    {MatchChar, '(', Const, IntE}
             IntE               pattern    {MatchPat, E, 0, CloseParen}
             CloseParen         pattern    {MatchChar, ')'}


             ; The Succeed pattern always succeeds.

             Succeed            pattern    {DoSucceed}


             ; We use digits from the UCR Standard Library cset standard sets.

                                include    stdsets.a

             dseg               ends



             cseg               segment    para public 'code'
                                assume     cs:cseg, ds:dseg

             ;   Debugging feature #1:
             ;   This is a special version of sl_Match2 that checks for
             ;   stack overflow. Stack overflow occurs whenever there
             ;   is an infinite loop (i.e., left recursion) in a pattern.

             MatchSP            proc      far
                                cmp        sp, offset StkOvrfl
                                jbe        AbortPgm
                                jmp        sl_Match2

             AbortPgm:         print
                               byte    cr,lf,lf
                               byte     "Error: Stack overflow in MatchSP routine.",cr,lf,0
                               ExitPgm
             MatchSP           endp

             ; DoSucceed matches the empty string. In other words, it matches anything
             ; and always returns success without eating any characters from the input
             ; string.

             DoSucceed          proc       far
                                mov        ax, di
                                stc
                                ret
             DoSucceed          endp

             ; DoFadd - Adds the two items on the top of the FPU stack.

             DoFadd             proc       far
                                faddp      st(1), st
                                mov        ax, di                 ;Required by sl_Match
                                stc                               ;Always succeed.
                                ret
             DoFadd             endp


             ; PushValue-       We've just matched a string that corresponds to a
             ;                  floating point constant. Convert it to a floating


Page 982
                                                                 Control Structures

;                point value and push that value onto the FPU stack.

PushValue        proc      far
                 push      ds
                 push      es
                 pusha
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax

                 lesi      Const        ;FP val matched by this pat.
                 patgrab                ;Get a copy of the string.
                 atof                   ;Convert to real.
                 free                   ;Return mem used by patgrab.
                 lesi      CurValue     ;Copy floating point accumulator
                 sdfpa                  ; to a local variable and then
                 fld       CurValue     ; copy that value to the FPU stk.

                 popa
                 mov       ax, di
                 pop       es
                 pop       ds
                 stc
                 ret
PushValue        endp

; The main program tests the expression evaluator.

Main             proc
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax
                 mov       es, ax
                 meminit

                 finit                  ;Be sure to do this!
                 fwait

                 lesi      TestStr
                 puts                   ;Print the expression

                 ldxi      Expression
                 xor       cx, cx
                 match
                 jc        GoodVal
                 printff
                 byte      " is an illegal expression",cr,lf,0
                 ret

GoodVal:         fstp      CurValue
                 printff
                 byte      " = %12.6ge\n",0
                 dword     CurValue

Quit:            ExitPgm
Main             endp
cseg             ends

sseg             segment   para stack 'stack'
                 word      64 dup (?)   ;Buffer for stack overflow
StkOvrfl         word      ?                       ;Stack overflow if drops
stk              db        1024 dup ("stack   "); below StkOvrfl.
sseg             ends

zzzzzzseg        segment   para public 'zzzzzz'
LastBytes        db        16 dup (?)
zzzzzzseg        ends
                 end       Main




                                                                         Page 983
Chapter 16


16.9.2       Printing Diagnostic Messages from a Pattern
                     When there is no other debugging method available, you can always use print state-
                ments to help track down problems in your patterns. If your program calls pattern match-
                ing functions in your own code (like the DoFAdd, DoSucceed, and PushValue procedures in
                the code above), you can easily insert print or printf statements in these functions that will
                print an appropriate message when they execute. Unfortunately, a problem may develop
                in a portion of a pattern that does not call any local pattern matching functions, so insert-
                ing print statements within an existing (local) pattern matching function might not help.
                To solve this problem, all you need to do is insert a call to a local pattern matching func-
                tion in the patterns you suspect have a problem.
                    Rather than make up a specific local pattern to print an individual message, a better
                solution is to write a generic pattern matching function whose whole purpose is to display
                a message. The following PatPrint function does exactly this:
                ; PatPrint- A debugging aid. This "Pattern matching function" prints
                ; the string that DS:SI points at.

                PatPrint            proc        far
                                    push        es
                                    push        di
                                    mov         di, ds
                                    mov         es, di
                                    mov         di, si
                                    puts
                                    mov         ax, di
                                    pop         di
                                    pop         es
                                    stc
                                    ret
                PatPrint            endp

                    From “Constructing Patterns for the MATCH Routine” on page 933, you will note that
                the pattern matching system passes the value of the MatchParm parameter to a pattern
                matching function in the ds:si register pair. The PatPrint function prints the string that ds:si
                points at (by moving ds:si to es:di and calling puts).
                    The following code (Ex16_1b.asm on the companion CD-ROM) demonstrates how to
                insert calls to PatPrint within your patterns to print out data to help you track down prob-
                lems in your patterns. For your lab report: run this program and describe its output in
                your report. Describe how this output can help you track down the problem with this pro-
                gram. Modify the grammar to match the grammar in the corresponding sample program
                (see “Evaluating Arithmetic Expressions” on page 948) while still printing out each pro-
                duction that this program processes. Run the result and include the output in your lab
                report.
                ;   EX16_1a.asm
                ;
                ;   A simple floating point calculator that demonstrates the use of the
                ;   UCR Standard Library pattern matching routines. Note that this
                ;   program requires an FPU.

                                    .xlist
                                    .386
                                    .387
                                    option     segment:use16
                                    include    stdlib.a
                                    includelib stdlib.lib
                                    matchfuncs
                                    .list

                ; If the symbol "DEBUG" is defined, then call the MatchSP routine
                ; to do stack overflow checking. If "DEBUG" is not defined, just
                ; call the sl_Match2 routine directly.


Page 984
                                                                     Control Structures


DEBUG               =         0             ;Define for debugging.

                    ifdef     DEBUG
MatchPat            textequ   <MatchSP>
                    else
MatchPat            textequ   <sl_Match2>
                    endif

dseg                segment   para public 'data'

; The following is a temporary used when converting a floating point
; string to a 64 bit real value.

CurValue            real8     0.0


; A Test String:

TestStr             byte      "5+2-(3-1)",0


;   Grammar for simple infix -> postfix translation operation:
;   Semantic rules appear in braces.
;
;   NOTE: This code has a serious problem. The first production
;   is left recursive and will generate an infinite loop.
;
;   E -> E+T {print result} | T {print result}
;   T -> <constant> {fld constant} | (E)
;
;   UCR Standard Library Pattern that handles the grammar above:

; An expression consists of an "E" item followed by the end of the string:

Expression          pattern   {MatchPat,E,,EndOfString}
EndOfString         pattern   {EOS}


; An "E" item consists of an "E" item optionally followed by "+" or "-"
; and a "T" item (E -> E+T | T):

E                   pattern   {PatPrint,EMsg,,E2}
EMsg                byte      "E->E+T | T",cr,lf,0

E2                  pattern   {MatchPat, E,T,Eplus}
Eplus               pattern   {MatchChar, '+', T, epPlus}
epPlus              pattern   {DoFadd,,,E3}
E3                  pattern   {PatPrint,EMsg3}
EMsg3               byte      "E->E+T",cr,lf,0


;   A "T" item is either a floating point constant or "(" followed by
;   an "E" item followed by ")".
;
;   The regular expression for a floating point constant is
;
;         [0-9]+ ( "." [0-9]* | ) ( ((e|E) (+|-| ) [0-9]+) | )
;
;   Note: the pattern "Const" matches exactly the characters specified
;        by the above regular expression. It is the pattern the calc-
;        ulator grabs when converting a string to a floating point number.

Const               pattern   {MatchPat, ConstStr, 0, FLDConst}
ConstStr            pattern   {MatchPat, DoDigits, 0, Const2}
Const2              pattern   {matchchar, '.', Const4, Const3}
Const3              pattern   {MatchPat, DoDigits, Const4, Const4}
Const4              pattern   {matchchar, 'e', const5, const6}
Const5              pattern   {matchchar, 'E', Succeed, const6}
Const6              pattern   {matchchar, '+', const7, const8}


                                                                             Page 985
Chapter 16

             Const7             pattern    {matchchar, '-', const8, const8}
             Const8             pattern    {MatchPat, DoDigits}

             FldConst           pattern    {PushValue,,,ConstMsg}
             ConstMsg           pattern    {PatPrint,CMsg}
             CMsg               byte       "T->const",cr,lf,0

             ; DoDigits handles the regular expression [0-9]+

             DoDigits           pattern    {Anycset, Digits, 0, SpanDigits}
             SpanDigits         pattern    {Spancset, Digits}

             ; The S production handles constants or an expression in parentheses.

             T                  pattern    {PatPrint,TMsg,,T2}
             TMsg               byte       "T->(E) | const",cr,lf,0

             T2                 pattern    {MatchChar, '(', Const, IntE}
             IntE               pattern    {MatchPat, E, 0, CloseParen}
             CloseParen         pattern    {MatchChar, ')',,T3}

             T3                 pattern    {PatPrint,TMsg3}
             TMsg3              byte       "T->(E)",cr,lf,0

             ; The Succeed pattern always succeeds.

             Succeed            pattern    {DoSucceed}

             ; We use digits from the UCR Standard Library cset standard sets.

                                include    stdsets.a

             dseg               ends

             cseg               segment    para public 'code'
                                assume     cs:cseg, ds:dseg

             ;   Debugging feature #1:
             ;   This is a special version of sl_Match2 that checks for
             ;   stack overflow. Stack overflow occurs whenever there
             ;   is an infinite loop (i.e., left recursion) in a pattern.

             MatchSP            proc      far
                                cmp        sp, offset StkOvrfl
                                jbe        AbortPgm
                                jmp        sl_Match2

             AbortPgm:         print
                               byte        cr,lf,lf
                               byte        "Error: Stack overflow in MatchSP routine.",cr,lf,0
                               ExitPgm
             MatchSP           endp

             ; PatPrint- A debugging aid. This "Pattern matching function" prints
             ; the string that DS:SI points at.

             PatPrint           proc       far
                                push       es
                                push       di
                                mov        di, ds
                                mov        es, di
                                mov        di, si
                                puts
                                mov        ax, di
                                pop        di
                                pop        es
                                stc
                                ret
             PatPrint           endp



Page 986
                                                                  Control Structures

; DoSucceed matches the empty string. In other words, it matches anything
; and always returns success without eating any characters from the input
; string.

DoSucceed        proc      far
                 mov       ax, di
                 stc
                 ret
DoSucceed        endp

; DoFadd - Adds the two items on the top of the FPU stack.

DoFadd           proc      far
                 faddp     st(1), st
                 mov       ax, di                    ;Required by sl_Match
                 stc                                 ;Always succeed.
                 ret
DoFadd           endp

; PushValue-     We've just matched a string that corresponds to a
;                floating point constant. Convert it to a floating
;                point value and push that value onto the FPU stack.

PushValue        proc      far
                 push      ds
                 push      es
                 pusha
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax

                 lesi      Const        ;FP val matched by this pat.
                 patgrab                ;Get a copy of the string.
                 atof                   ;Convert to real.
                 free                   ;Return mem used by patgrab.
                 lesi      CurValue     ;Copy floating point accumulator
                 sdfpa                  ; to a local variable and then
                 fld       CurValue     ; copy that value to the FPU stk.

                 popa
                 mov       ax, di
                 pop       es
                 pop       ds
                 stc
                 ret
PushValue        endp



; The main program tests the expression evaluator.

Main             proc
                 mov       ax, dseg
                 mov       ds, ax
                 mov       es, ax
                 meminit

                 finit                  ;Be sure to do this!
                 fwait

                 lesi      TestStr
                 puts                   ;Print the expression

                 ldxi      Expression
                 xor       cx, cx
                 match
                 jc        GoodVal
                 printff
                 byte      " is an illegal expression",cr,lf,0
                 ret



                                                                             Page 987
Chapter 16

             GoodVal:fstp       CurValue
                                printff
                                byte     " = %12.6ge\n",0
                                dword    CurValue

             Quit:              ExitPgm
             Main               endp
             cseg               ends

             sseg               segment    para stack 'stack'
                                word       64 dup (?)                 ;Buffer for stack overflow
             StkOvrfl           word       ?                          ;Stack overflow if drops
             stk                db         1024 dup ("stack   ")      ; below StkOvrfl.
             sseg               ends

             zzzzzzseg          segment    para public 'zzzzzz'
             LastBytes          db         16 dup (?)
             zzzzzzseg          ends
                                end        Main




16.10 Programming Projects
    1)       Modify the program in Section 16.8.3 (Arith2.asm on the companion CD-ROM) so that it
             includes some common trigonometric operations (sin, cos, tan, etc.). See the chapter on
             floating point arithmetic to see how to compute these functions. The syntax for the func-
             tions should be similar to “sin(E)” where “E” represents an arbitrary expression.
    2)       Modify the (English numeric input problem in Section 16.8.1 to handle negative numbers.
             The pattern should allow the use of the prefixes “negative” or “minus” to denote a nega-
             tive number.
    3)       Modify the (English) numeric input problem in Section 16.8.1 to handle four byte
             unsigned integers.
    4)       Write your own “Adventure” game based on the programming techniques found in the
             “Madventure” game in Section 16.8.5.
    5)       Write a “tiny assembler” for the modern version of the x86 processor using the techniques
             found in Section 16.8.4.
    6)       Write a simple “DOS Shell” program that reads a line of text from the user and processes
             valid DOS commands found on that line. Handle at least the DEL, RENAME, TYPE, and
             COPY commands. See “MS-DOS, PC-BIOS, and File I/O” on page 699 for information
             concerning the implementation of these DOS commands.



16.11 Summary
                 This has certainly been a long chapter. The general topic of pattern matching receives
             insufficient attention in most textbooks. In fact, you rarely see more than a dozen or so
             pages dedicated to it outside of automata theory texts, compiler texts, or texts covering
             pattern matching languages like Icon or SNOBOL4. That is one of the main reasons this
             chapter is extensive, to help cover the paucity of information available elsewhere. How-
             ever, there is another reason for the length of this chapter and, especially, the number of
             lines of code appearing in this chapter – to demonstrate how easy it is to develop certain
             classes of programs using pattern matching techniques. Could you imagine having to
             write a program like Madventure using standard C or Pascal programming techniques?
             The resulting program would probably be longer than the assembly version appearing in
             this chapter! If you are not impressed with the power of pattern matching, you should
             probably reread this chapter. It is very surprising how few programmers truly understand
             the theory of pattern matching; especially considering how many program use, or could
             benefit from, pattern matching techniques.

Page 988
                                                                            Control Structures

     This chapter begins by discussing the theory behind pattern matching. It discusses
simple patterns, known as regular languages, and describes how to design nondeterministic
and deterministic finite state automata – the functions that match patterns described by regu-
lar expressions. This chapter also describes how to convert NFAs and DFAs into assembly
language programs. For the details, see
        •   “An Introduction to Formal Language (Automata) Theory” on page 883
        •   “Machines vs. Languages” on page 883
        •   “Regular Languages” on page 884
        •   “Regular Expressions” on page 885
        •   “Nondeterministic Finite State Automata (NFAs)” on page 887
        •   “Converting Regular Expressions to NFAs” on page 888
        •   “Converting an NFA to Assembly Language” on page 890
        •   “Deterministic Finite State Automata (DFAs)” on page 893
        •   “Converting a DFA to Assembly Language” on page 895
     Although the regular languages are probably the most commonly processed patterns
in modern pattern matching programs, they are also only a small subset of the possible
types of patterns you can process in a program. The context free languages include all the
regular languages as a subset and introduce many types of patterns that are not regular.
To represent a context free language, we often use a context free grammar. A CFG contains a
set of expressions known as productions. This set of productions, a set of nonterminal sym-
bols, a set of terminal symbols, and a special nonterminal, the starting symbol, provide the
basis for converting powerful patterns into a programming language.
     In this chapter, we’ve covered a special set of the context free grammars known as
LL(1) grammars. To properly encode a CFG as an assembly language program, you must
first convert the grammar to an LL(1) grammar. This encoding yields a recursive descent
predictive parser. Two primary steps required before converting a grammar to a program
that recognizes strings in the context free language is to eliminate left recursion from the
grammar and left factor the grammar. After these two steps, it is relatively easy to convert
a CFG to an assembly language program.
    For more information on CFGs, see
        •   “Context Free Languages” on page 900
        •   “Eliminating Left Recursion and Left Factoring CFGs” on page 903
        •   “Converting CFGs to Assembly Language” on page 905
        •   “Some Final Comments on CFGs” on page 912
    Sometimes it is easier to deal with regular expressions rather than context free gram-
mars. Since CFGs are more powerful than regular expressions, this text generally adopts
grammars whereever possible However, regular expressions are generally easier to work
with (for simple patterns), especially in the early stages of development. Sooner or later,
though, you may need to convert a regular expression to a CFG so you can combine it
with other components of the grammar. This is very easy to do and there is a simple algo-
rithm to convert REs to CFGs. For more details, see
        •   “Converting REs to CFGs” on page 905
    Although converting CFGs to assembly language is a straightforward process, it is
very tedious. The UCR Standard Library includes a set of pattern matching routines that
completely eliminate this tedium and provide many additional capabilities as well (such
as automatic backtracking, allowing you to encode grammars that are not LL(1)). The pat-
tern matching package in the Standard Library is probably the most novel and powerful
set of routines available therein. You should definitely investigate the use of these rou-
tines, they can save you considerable time. For more information, see
        •   “The UCR Standard Library Pattern Matching Routines” on page 913
        •   “The Standard Library Pattern Matching Functions” on page 914
    One neat feature the Standard Library provides is your ability to write customized
pattern matching functions. In addition to letting you provide pattern matching facilities


                                                                                     Page 989
Chapter 16

             missing from the library, these pattern matching functions let you add semantic rules to
             your grammars. For all the details, see
                     •   “Designing Your Own Pattern Matching Routines” on page 922
                     •   “Extracting Substrings from Matched Patterns” on page 925
                     •   “Semantic Rules and Actions” on page 929
                 Although the UCR Standard Library provides a powerful set of pattern matching rou-
             tines, its richness may be its primary drawback. Those who encounter the Standard
             Library’s pattern matching routines for the first time may be overwhelmed, especially
             when attempting to reconcile the material in the section on context free grammars with
             the Standard Library patterns. Fortunately, there is a straightforward, if inefficient, way to
             translate CFGs into Standard Library patterns. This technique is outlined in
                     •   “Constructing Patterns for the MATCH Routine” on page 933
                 Although pattern matching is a very powerful paradigm that most programmers
             should familiarize themselves with, most people have a hard time seeing the applications
             when they first encounter pattern matching. Therefore, this chapter concludes with some
             very complete programs that demonstrate pattern matching in action. These examples
             appear in the section:
                     •   “Some Sample Pattern Matching Applications” on page 935




Page 990
                                                                                                   Control Structures


16.12 Questions

  1)       Assume that you have two inputs that are either zero or one. Create a DFA to implement the following
           logic functions (assume that arriving in a final state is equivalent to being true, if you wind up in a
           non-accepting state you return false)
           a) OR                         b) XOR                       c) NAND                       d) NOR
           e) Equals (XNOR)              f) AND
                                          A Input           B Input

                                            0                1
                                     1                 3                5


                                                    Example, A<B


  2)       If r, s, and t are regular expressions, what strings with the following regular expressions match?
           a) r*                         b) r s                       c) r+                         d) r | s


  3)       Provide a regular expression for integers that allow commas every three digits as per U.S. syntax (e.g., for
           every three digits from the right of the number there must be exactly one comma). Do not allow misplaced
           commas.
  4)       Pascal real constants must have at least one digit before the decimal point. Provide a regular expression for
           FORTRAN real constants that does not have this restriction.
  5)       In many language systems (e.g., FORTRAN and C) there are two types of floating point numbers, single
           precision and double precision. Provide a regular expression for real numbers that allows the input of
           floating point numbers using any of the characters [dDeE] as the exponent symbol (d/D stands for double
           precision).
  6)       Provide an NFA that recognizes the mnemonics for the 886 instruction set.
  7)       Convert the NFA above into assembly language. Do not use the Standard Library pattern matching rou-
           tines.
  8)       Repeat question (7) using the Standard Library pattern matching routines.
  9)       Create a DFA for Pascal identifiers.
  10)      Convert the above DFA to assembly code using straight assembly statements.
  11)      Convert the above DFA to assembly code using a state table with input classification. Describe the data in
           your classification table.
  12)      Eliminate left recursion from the following grammar:
           Stmt        →       if expression then Stmt endif
                       |       if expression then Stmt else Stmt endif
                       |       Stmt ; Stmt
                       |       ε

  13)      Left factor the grammar you produce in problem 12.
  14)      Convert the result from question (13) into assembly language without using the Standard Library pattern
           matching routines.
  15)      Convert the result from question (13) in assembly language using the Standard Library pattern matching
           routines.

                                                                                                                Page 991
Chapter 16

    16)      Convert the regular expression obtained in question (3) to a set of productions for a context free grammar.
    17)      Why is the ARB matching function inefficient? Describe how the pattern (ARB “hello” ARB) would match
             the string “hello there”.
    18)      Spancset matches zero or more occurrences of some characters in a character set. Write a pattern match-
             ing function, callable as the first field of the pattern data type, that matches one or more occurrences of
             some character (feel free to look at the sources for spancset).
    19)      Write the matchichar pattern matching function that matches an individual character regardless of case
             (feel free to look at the sources for matchchar).
    20)      Explain how to use a pattern matching function to implement a semantic rule.
    21)      How would you extract a substring from a matched pattern?
    22)      What are parenthetical patterns? How to you create them?




Page 992
