Resident Programs                                                                                Chapter 18
                 Most MS-DOS applications are transient. They load into memory, execute, terminate, and DOS uses
            the memory allocated to the application for the next program the user executes. Resident programs follow
            these same rules, except for the last. A resident program, upon termination, does not return all memory
            back to DOS. Instead, a portion of the program remains resident, ready to be reactivated by some other
            program at a future time.
                 Resident programs, also known as terminate and stay resident programs or TSRs, provide a tiny
            amount of multitasking to an otherwise single tasking operating system. Until Microsoft Windows
            became popular, resident programs were the most popular way to allow multiple applications to coexist
            in memory at one time. Although Windows has diminished the need for TSRs for background processing,
            TSRs are still valuable for writing device drivers, antiviral tools, and program patches. This chapter will dis-
            cuss the issues you must deal with when writing resident programs.


18.1   DOS Memory Usage and TSRs
                 When you first boot DOS, the memory layout will look something like the following:
                                0FFFFFh                       High Memory Area (HMA) and Upper Memory Blocks (UMB)
                                                               Video, ROM, and Adapter memory space
                         0BFFFFh (640K)

                                                               Memory available for application use
                                                                   Free Memory Pointer

                                                              Interrupt vectors, BIOS variables, DOS variables, and
                                 00000h                       lower memory portion of DOS.

                                      DOS Memory Map (no active application)
                DOS maintains a free memory pointer that points the the beginning of the block of free memory.
            When the user runs an application program, DOS loads this application starting at the address the free
            memory pointer contains. Since DOS generally runs only a single application at a time, all the memory
            from the free memory pointer to the end of RAM (0BFFFFh) is available for the application’s use:
                               0FFFFFh

                                                                 Free Memory Pointer
                       0BFFFFh (640K)


                                                              Memory in use by application



                                00000h


                              DOS Memory Map (w/active application)
            When the program terminates normally via DOS function 4Ch (the Standard Library exitpgm macro),
            MS-DOS reclaims the memory in use by the application and resets the free memory pointer to just above
            DOS in low memory.


                                                                                                                Page 1025

                       Thi d             t        t d ith F         M k     402
Chapter 18

                           MS-DOS provides a second termination call which is identical to the terminate call with one excep-
                     tion, it does not reset the free memory pointer to reclaim all the memory in use by the application. Instead,
                     this terminate and stay resident call frees all but a specified block of memory. The TSR call (ah=31h)
                     requires two parameters, a process termination code in the al register (usually zero) and dx must contain
                     the size of the memory block to protect, in paragraphs. When DOS executes this code, it adjusts the free
                     memory pointer so that it points at a location dx*16 bytes above the program’s PSP (see “MS-DOS,
                     PC-BIOS, and File I/O” on page 699). This leaves memory looking like this:
                                      0FFFFFh


                              0BFFFFh (640K)


                                                                              Free Memory Pointer
                                                                          Memory in use by resident application

                                        00000h


                                      DOS Memory Map (w/resident application)
                     When the user executes a new application, DOS loads it into memory at the new free memory pointer
                     address, protecting the resident program in memory:
                                      0FFFFFh

                                                                              Free Memory Pointer
                              0BFFFFh (640K)

                                                                          Memory in use by normal application

                                                                          Memory in use by resident application

                                        00000h

                               DOS Memory Map (w/resident and normal application)
                     When this new application terminates, DOS reclaims its memory and readjusts the free memory pointer to
                     its location before running the application – just above the resident program. By using this free memory
                     pointer scheme, DOS can protect the memory in use by the resident program1.
                          The trick to using the terminate and stay resident call is to figure out how many paragraphs should
                     remain resident. Most TSRs contain two sections of code: a resident portion and a transient portion. The
                     transient portion is the data, main program, and support routines that execute when you run the program
                     from the command line. This code will probably never execute again. Therefore, you should not leave it in
                     memory when your program terminates. After all, every byte consumed by the TSR program is one less
                     byte available to other application programs.
                          The resident portion of the program is the code that remains in memory and provides whatever func-
                     tions are necessary of the TSR. Since the PSP is usually right before the first byte of program code, to effec-
                     tively use the DOS TSR call, your program must be organized as follows:




    1. Of course, DOS could never protect the resident program from an errant application. If the application decides to write zeros all over memory,
    the resident program, DOS, and many other memory areas will be destroyed.

Page 1026
                                                                                      Resident Programs



              High addresses                     SSEG, ZZZZZZSEG, etc.

                                                 Transient code


                                                 Resident code and data

              Low addresses                     PSP

              Memory Organization for a Resident Program
     To use TSRs effectively, you need to organize your code and data so that the resident portions of your
program loads into lower memory addresses and the transient portions load into the higher memory
addresses. MASM and the Microsoft Linker both provide facilities that let you control the loading order of
segments within your code (see “MASM: Directives & Pseudo-Opcodes” on page 355). The simple solu-
tion, however, is to put all your resident code and data in a single segment and make sure that this seg-
ment appears first in every source module of your program. In particular, if you are using the UCR
Standard Library SHELL.ASM file, you must make sure that you define your resident segments before the
include directives for the standard library files. Otherwise MS-DOS will load all the standard library rou-
tines before your resident segment and that would waste considerable memory. Note that you only need
to define your resident segment first, you do not have to place all the resident code and data before the
includes. The following will work just fine:
ResidentSeg        segment        para public ‘resident’
ResidentSeg        ends

EndResident        segment        para public ‘EndRes’
EndResident        ends

                   .xlist
                   include    stdlib.a
                   includelib stdlib.lib
                   .list


ResidentSeg        segment        para public ‘resident’
                   assume         cs:ResidentSeg, ds:ResidentSeg

PSP                word           ?                   ;This var must be here!

; Put resident code and data here

ResidentSeg        ends


dseg               segment        para public ‘data’

; Put transient data here

dseg               ends


cseg               segment        para public ‘code’
                   assume         cs:cseg, ds:dseg

; Put Transient code here.

cseg               ends
                   etc.

The purpose of the EndResident segment will become clear in a moment. For more information on
DOS memory ordering, see Chapter Six.



                                                                                               Page 1027
Chapter 18

                  Now the only problem is to figure out the size of the resident code, in paragraphs. With your code
             structured in the manner shown above, determining the size of the resident program is quite easy, just use
             the following statements to terminate the transient portion of your code (in cseg):
                                mov            ax, ResidentSeg         ;Need access to ResidentSeg
                                mov            es, ax
                                mov            ah, 62h                 ;DOS Get PSP call.
                                int            21h
                                mov            es:PSP, bx              ;Save PSP value in PSP variable.

             ;   The following code computes the sixe of the resident portion of the code.
             ;   The EndResident segment is the first segment in memory after resident code.
             ;   The program’s PSP value is the segment address of the start of the resident
             ;   block. By computing EndResident-PSP we compute the size of the resident
             ;   portion in paragraphs.

                                mov            dx, EndResident         ;Get EndResident segment address.
                                sub            dx, bx                  ;Subtract PSP.

             ; Okay, execute the TSR call, preserving only the resident code.

                                mov            ax, 3100h               ;AH=31h (TSR), AL=0 (return code).
                                int            21h

             Executing the code above returns control to MS-DOS, preserving your resident code in memory.
                  There is one final memory management detail to consider before moving on to other topics related to
             resident programs – accessing data within an resident program. Procedures within a resident program
             become active in response to a direct call from some other program or a hardware interrupt (see the next
             section). Upon entry, the resident routine may specify that certain registers contain various parameters,
             but one thing you cannot expect is for the calling code to properly set up the segment registers for you.
             Indeed, the only segment register that will contain a meaningful value (to the resident code) is the code
             segment register. Since many resident functions will want to access local data, this means that those func-
             tions may need to set up ds or some other segment register(s) upon initial entry. For example, suppose
             you have a function, count, that simply counts the number of times some other code calls it once it has
             gone resident. One would thing that the body of this function would contain a single instruction:
             inc counter. Unfortunately, such an instruction would increment the variable at counter’s offset in the
             current data segment (that is, the segment pointed at by the ds register). It is unlikely that ds would be
             pointing at the data segment associated with the count procedure. Therefore, you would be incrementing
             some word in a different segment (probably the caller’s data segment). This would produce disastrous
             results.
                  There are two solutions to this problem. The first is to put all variables in the code segment (a very
             common practice in resident sections of code) and use a cs: segment override prefix on all your variables.
             For example, to increment the counter variable you could use the instruction inc cs:counter. This
             technique works fine if there are only a few variable references in your procedures. However, it suffers
             from a few serious drawbacks. First, the segment override prefix makes your instructions larger and
             slower; this is a serious problem if you access many different variables throughout your resident code. Sec-
             ond, it is easy to forget to place the segment override prefix on a variable, thereby causing the TSR func-
             tion to wipe out memory in the caller’s data segment. Another solution to the segment problem is to
             change the value in the ds register upon entry to a resident procedure and restore it upon exit. The fol-
             lowing code demonstrates how to do this:
                                push           ds                      ;Preserve original DS value.
                                push           cs                      ;Copy CS’s value to DS.
                                pop            ds
                                inc            Counter                 ;Bump the variable’s value.
                                pop            ds                      ;Restore original DS value.

             Of course, using the cs: segment override prefix is a much more reasonable solution here. However, had
             the code been extensive and had accessed many local variables, loading ds with cs (assuming you put
             your variables in the resident segment) would be more efficient.



Page 1028
                                                                                                                                 Resident Programs


18.2     Active vs. Passive TSRs
                          Microsoft identifies two types of TSR routines: active and passive. A passive TSR is one that activates
                     in response to an explicit call from an executing application program. An active TSR is one that responds
                     to a hardware interrupt or one that a hardware interrupt calls.
                          TSRs are almost always interrupt service routines (see “80x86 Interrupt Structure and Interrupt Service
                     Routines (ISRs)” on page 996). Active TSRs are typically hardware interrupt service routines and passive
                     TSRs are generally trap handlers (see “Traps” on page 999). Although, in theory, it is possible for a TSR to
                     determine the address of a routine in a passive TSR and call that routine directly, the 80x86 trap mecha-
                     nism is the perfect device for calling such routines, so most TSRs use it.
                          Passive TSRs generally provide a callable library of routines or extend some DOS or BIOS call. For
                     example, you might want to reroute all characters an application sends to the printer to a file. By patching
                     into the int 17h vector (see “The PC Parallel Ports” on page 1199) you can intercept all characters destined
                     for the printer2. Or you could add additional functionality to a BIOS routine by chaining into its interrupt
                     vector. For example, you could add new function calls to the int 10h BIOS video services routine (see
                     “MS-DOS, PC-BIOS, and File I/O” on page 699) by looking for a special value in ah and passing all other
                     int 10h calls on through to the original handler. Another use of a passive TSR is to provide a brand new set
                     of services through a new interrupt vector that the BIOS does not already provide. The mouse services,
                     provided by the mouse.com driver, is a good example of such a TSR.
                           Active TSRs generally serve one of two functions. They either service a hardware interrupt directly, or
                     they piggyback off the hardware interrupt so they can activate themselves on a periodic basis without an
                     explicit call from an application. Pop-up programs are a good example of active TSRs. A pop-up program
                     chains itself into the PC’s keyboard interrupt (int 9). Pressing a key activates such a program. The program
                     can read the PC’s keyboard port (see “The PC Keyboard” on page 1153) to see if the user is pressing a spe-
                     cial key sequence. Should this keysequence appear, the application can save a portion of the screen mem-
                     ory and “pop-up” on the screen, perform some user-requested function, and then restore the screen when
                     done. Borland’s Sidekick program is an example of an extremely popular TSR program, though many
                     others exist.
                         Not all active TSRs are pop-ups, though. Certain viruses are good examples of active TSRs. They
                     patch into various interrupt vectors that activate them automatically so they can go about their dastardly
                     deeds. Fortunately, some anti-viral programs are also good examples of active TSRs, they patch into those
                     same interrupt vectors and detect the activities of a virus and attempt to limit the damage the virus may
                     cause.
                           Note that a TSR may contain both active and passive components. That is, there may be certain rou-
                     tines that a hardware interrupt invokes and others that an application calls explicitly. However, if any rou-
                     tine in a resident program is active, we’ll claim that the entire TSR is active.
                          The following program is a short example of a TSR that provides both active and passive routines.
                     This program patches into the int 9 (keyboard interrupt) and int 16h (keyboard trap) interrupt vectors.
                     Every time the system generates a keyboard interrupt, the active routine (int 9) increments a counter. Since
                     the keyboard usually generates two keyboard interrupts per keystroke, dividing this value by two pro-
                     duces the approximate number of keys typed since starting the TSR3. A passive routine, tied into the
                     int 16h vector, returns the number of keystrokes to the calling program. The following code provides two
                     programs, the TSR and a short application to display the number of keystrokes since the TSR started run-
                     ning.
                     ; This is an example of an active TSR that counts keyboard interrupts
                     ; once activated.

                     ; The resident segment definitions must come before everything else.


   2. Assuming the application uses DOS or BIOS to print the characters and does not talk directly to the printer port itself.
   3. It is not an exact count because some keys generate more than two keyboard interrupts.

                                                                                                                                        Page 1029
Chapter 18


             ResidentSeg   segment    para public ‘Resident’
             ResidentSeg   ends

             EndResident   segment    para public ‘EndRes’
             EndResident   ends

                           .xlist
                           include    stdlib.a
                           includelib stdlib.lib
                           .list


             ; Resident segment that holds the TSR code:

             ResidentSeg   segment    para public ‘Resident’
                           assume     cs:ResidentSeg, ds:nothing

             ; The following variable counts the number of keyboard interrupts

             KeyIntCnt     word       0

             ; These two variables contain the original INT 9 and INT 16h
             ; interrupt vector values:

             OldInt9       dword      ?
             OldInt16      dword      ?


             ; MyInt9-     The system calls this routine every time a keyboard
             ;             interrupt occus. This routine increments the
             ;             KeyIntCnt variable and then passes control on to the
             ;             original Int9 handler.

             MyInt9        proc       far
                           inc        ResidentSeg:KeyIntCnt
                           jmp        ResidentSeg:OldInt9
             MyInt9        endp




             ; MyInt16-    This is the passive component of this TSR. An
             ;             application explicitly calls this routine with an
             ;             INT 16h instruction. If AH contains 0FFh, this
             ;             routine returns the number of keyboard interrupts
             ;             in the AX register. If AH contains any other value,
             ;             this routine passes control to the original INT 16h
             ;             (keyboard trap) handler.

             MyInt16       proc       far
                           cmp        ah, 0FFh
                           je         ReturnCnt
                           jmp        ResidentSeg:OldInt16;Call original handler.

             ; If AH=0FFh, return the keyboard interrupt count

             ReturnCnt:    mov        ax, ResidentSeg:KeyIntCnt
                           iret
             MyInt16       endp


             ResidentSeg   ends



             cseg          segment    para public ‘code’
                           assume     cs:cseg, ds:ResidentSeg

             Main          proc
                           meminit

                           mov        ax, ResidentSeg
                           mov        ds, ax


Page 1030
                                                                               Resident Programs

                   mov            ax, 0
                   mov            es, ax

                   print
                   byte           “Keyboard interrupt counter TSR program”,cr,lf
                   byte           “Installing....”,cr,lf,0

;   Patch into the INT 9 and INT 16 interrupt vectors. Note that the
;   statements above have made ResidentSeg the current data segment,
;   so we can store the old INT 9 and INT 16 values directly into
;   the OldInt9 and OldInt16 variables.

                   cli                              ;Turn off interrupts!
                   mov            ax, es:[9*4]
                   mov            word ptr OldInt9, ax
                   mov            ax, es:[9*4 + 2]
                   mov            word ptr OldInt9+2, ax
                   mov            es:[9*4], offset MyInt9
                   mov            es:[9*4+2], seg ResidentSeg

                   mov            ax, es:[16h*4]
                   mov            word ptr OldInt16, ax
                   mov            ax, es:[16h*4 + 2]
                   mov            word ptr OldInt16+2, ax
                   mov            es:[16h*4], offset MyInt16
                   mov            es:[16h*4+2], seg ResidentSeg
                   sti                              ;Okay, ints back on.

; We’re hooked up, the only thing that remains is to terminate and
; stay resident.

                   print
                   byte           “Installed.”,cr,lf,0

                   mov            ah, 62h                 ;Get this program’s PSP
                   int            21h                     ; value.

                   mov            dx, EndResident         ;Compute size of program.
                   sub            dx, bx
                   mov            ax, 3100h               ;DOS TSR command.
                   int            21h
Main               endp
cseg               ends

sseg               segment        para stack ‘stack’
stk                db             1024 dup (“stack “)
sseg               ends

zzzzzzseg          segment        para public ‘zzzzzz’
LastBytes          db             16 dup (?)
zzzzzzseg          ends
                   end            Main


Here’s the application that calls MyInt16 to print the number of keystrokes:
;   This is the companion program to the keycnt TSR.
;   This program calls the “MyInt16” routine in the TSR to
;   determine the number of keyboard interrupts. It displays
;   the approximate number of keystrokes (keyboard ints/2)
;   and quits.

                   .xlist
                   include    stdlib.a
                   includelib stdlib.lib
                   .list

cseg               segment        para public ‘code’
                   assume         cs:cseg, ds:nothing

Main               proc
                   meminit

                   print


                                                                                      Page 1031
Chapter 18

                                 byte           “Approximate number of keys pressed: “,0
                                 mov            ah, 0FFh
                                 int            16h
                                 shr            ax, 1             ;Must divide by two.
                                 putu
                                 putcr
                                 ExitPgm

             Main                endp
             cseg                ends

             sseg                segment        para stack ‘stack’
             stk                 db             1024 dup (“stack “)
             sseg                ends

             zzzzzzseg           segment        para public ‘zzzzzz’
             LastBytes           db             16 dup (?)
             zzzzzzseg           ends
                                 end            Main




18.3    Reentrancy
                  One big problem with active TSRs is that their invocation is asynchronous. They can activate at the
             touch of a keystroke, timer interrupt, or via an incoming character on the serial port, just to name a few.
             Since they activate on a hardware interrupt, the PC could have been executing just about any code when
             the interrupt came along. This isn’t a problem unless the TSR itself decides to call some foreign code, such
             as DOS, a BIOS routine, or some other TSR. For example, the main application may be making a DOS call
             when a timer interrupt activates a TSR, interrupting the call to DOS while the CPU is still executing code
             inside DOS. If the TSR attempts to make a call to DOS at this point, then this will reenter DOS. Of course,
             DOS is not reentrant, so this creates all kinds of problems (usually, it hangs the system). When writing
             active TSRs that call other routines besides those provided directly in the TSR, you must be aware of possi-
             ble reentrancy problems.
                  Note that passive TSRs never suffer from this problem. Indeed, any TSR routine you call passively will
             execute in the caller’s environment. Unless some other hardware ISR or active TSR makes the call to your
             routine, you do not need to worry about reentrancy with passive routines. However, reentrancy is an issue
             for active TSR routines and passive routines that active TSRs call.


18.3.1 Reentrancy Problems with DOS
                  DOS is probably the biggest sore point to TSR developers. DOS is not reentrant yet DOS contains
             many services a TSR might use. Realizing this, Microsoft has added some support to DOS to allow TSRs to
             see if DOS is currently active. After all, reentrancy is only a problem if you call DOS while it is already
             active. If it isn’t already active, you can certainly call it from a TSR with no ill effects.
                   MS-DOS provides a special one-byte flag (InDOS) that contains a zero if DOS is currently active and a
             non-zero value if DOS is already processing an application request. By testing the InDOS flag your TSR
             can determine if it can safely make a DOS call. If this flag is zero, you can always make the DOS call. If this
             flag contains one, you may not be able to make the DOS call. MS-DOS provides a function call, Get InDOS
             Flag Address, that returns the address of the InDOS flag. To use this function, load ah with 34h and call
             DOS. DOS will return the address of the InDOS flag in es:bx. If you save this address, your resident pro-
             grams will be able to test the InDOS flag to see if DOS is active.
                  Actually, there are two flags you should test, the InDOS flag and the critical error flag (criterr). Both
             of these flags should contain zero before you call DOS from a TSR. In DOS version 3.1 and later, the criti-
             cal error flag appears in the byte just before the InDOS flag.




Page 1032
                                                                                                     Resident Programs

                 So what should you do if these flags aren’t both zero? It’s easy enough to say “hey, come back and do
           this stuff later when MS-DOS returns back to the user program.” But how do you do this? For example, if a
           keyboard interrupt activates your TSR and you pass control on to the real keyboard handler because DOS
           is busy, you can’t expect your TSR to be magically restarted later on when DOS is no longer active.
                The trick is to patch your TSR into the timer interrupt as well as the keyboard interrupt. When the key-
           stroke interrupt wakes your TSR and you discover that DOS is busy, the keyboard ISR can simply set a flag
           to tell itself to try again later; then it passes control to the original keyboard handler. In the meantime, a
           timer ISR you’ve written is constantly checking this flag you’ve created. If the flag is clear, it simply passes
           control on to the original timer interrupt handler, if the flag is set, then the code checks the InDOS and
           CritErr flags. If these guys say that DOS is busy, the timer ISR passes control on to the original timer han-
           dler. Shortly after DOS finishes whatever it was doing, a timer interrupt will come along and detect that
           DOS is no longer active. Now your ISR can take over and make any necessary calls to DOS that it wants.
           Of course, once your timer code determines that DOS is not busy, it should clear the “I want service” flag
           so that future timer interrupts don’t inadvertently restart the TSR.
                There is only one problem with this approach. There are certain DOS calls that can take an indefinite
           amount of time to execute. For example, if you call DOS to read a key from the keyboard (or call the Stan-
           dard Library’s getc routine that calls DOS to read a key), it could be hours, days, or even longer before
           somebody actually bothers to press a key. Inside DOS there is a loop that waits until the user actually
           presses a key. And until the user presses some key, the InDOS flag is going to remain non-zero. If you’ve
           written a timer-based TSR that is buffering data every few seconds and needs to write the results to disk
           every now and then, you will overflow your buffer with new data if you wait for the user, who just went to
           lunch, to press a key in DOS’ command.com program.
                Luckily, MS-DOS provides a solution to this problem as well – the idle interrupt. While MS-DOS is in
           an indefinite loop wait for an I/O device, it continually executes an int 28h i nstruction. By patching into
           the int 28h vector, your TSR can determine when DOS is sitting in such a loop. When DOS executes the
           int 28h instruction, it is safe to make any DOS call whose function number (the value in ah) is greater than
           0Ch.
                So if DOS is busy when your TSR wants to make a DOS call, you must use either a timer interrupt or
           the idle interrupt (int 28h) to activate the portion of your TSR that must make DOS calls. One final thing to
           keep in mind is that whenever you test or modify any of the above mentioned flags, you are in a critical
           section. Make sure the interrupts are off. If not, your TSR make activate two copies of itself or you may
           wind up entering DOS at the same time some other TSR enters DOS.
                An example of a TSR using these techniques will appear a little later, but there are some additional
           reentrancy problems we need to discuss first.


18.3.2 Reentrancy Problems with BIOS
                 DOS isn’t the only non-reentrant code a TSR might want to call. The PC’s BIOS routines also fall into
           this category. Unfortunately, BIOS doesn’t provide an “InBIOS” flag or a multiplex interrupt. You will have
           to supply such functionality yourself.
                The key to preventing reentering a BIOS routine you want to call is to use a wrapper. A wrapper is a
           short ISR that patches into an existing BIOS interrupt specifically to manipulate an InUse flag. For exam-
           ple, suppose you need to make an int 10h (video services) call from within your TSR. You could use the
           following code to provide an “Int10InUse” flag that your TSR could test:
           MyInt10             proc           far
                               inc            cs:Int10InUse
                               pushf
                               call           cs:OldInt10
                               dec            cs:Int10InUse
                               iret
           MyInt10             endp



                                                                                                               Page 1033
Chapter 18

                   Assuming you’ve initialized the Int10InUse variable to zero, the in use flag will contain zero when it is
              safe to execute an int 10h instruction in your TSR, it will contain a non-zero value when the interrupt 10h
              handler is busy. You can use this flag like the InDOS flag to defer the execution of your TSR code.
                   Like DOS, there are certain BIOS routines that may take an indefinite amount of time to complete.
              Reading a key from the keyboard buffer, reading or writing characters on the serial port, or printing char-
              acters to the printer are some examples. While, in some cases, it is possible to create a wrapper that lets
              your TSR activate itself while a BIOS routine is executing one of these polling loops, there is probably no
              benefit to doing so. For example, if an application program is waiting for the printer to take a character
              before it sends another to printer, having your TSR preempt this and attempt to send a character to the
              printer won’t accomplish much (other than scramble the data sent to the print). Therefore, BIOS wrappers
              generally don’t worry about indefinite postponement in a BIOS routine.
                   5, 8, 9, D, E, 10, 13, 16, 17, 21, 28
                   If you run into problems with your TSR code and certain application programs, you may want to
              place wrappers around the following interrupts to see if this solves your problem: int 5, int 8, int 9, int B,
              int C, int D, int E, int 10, int 13, int 14, int 16, or int 17. These are common culprits when TSR problems
              develop.


18.3.3 Reentrancy Problems with Other Code
                   Reentrancy problems occur in other code you might call as well. For example, consider the UCR Stan-
              dard Library. The UCR Standard Library is not reentrant. This usually isn’t much of a problem for a couple
              of reasons. First, most TSRs do not call Standard Library subroutines. Instead, they provide results that
              normal applications can use; those applications use the Standard Library routines to manipulate such
              results. A second reason is that were you to include some Standard Library routines in a TSR, the applica-
              tion would have a separate copy of the library routines. The TSR might execute an strcmp instruction
              while the application is in the middle of an strcmp routine, but these are not the same routines! The TSR is
              not reentering the application’s code, it is executing a separate routine.
                   However, many of the Standard Library functions make DOS or BIOS calls. Such calls do not check to
              see if DOS or BIOS is already active. Therefore, calling many Standard Library routines from within a TSR
              may cause you to reenter DOS or BIOS.
                    One situation does exist where a TSR could reenter a Standard Library routine. Suppose your TSR has
              both passive and active components. If the main application makes a call to a passive routine in your TSR
              and that routine call a Standard Library routine, there is the possibility that a system interrupt could inter-
              rupt the Standard Library routine and the active portion of the TSR reenter that same code. Although such
              a situation would be extremely rare, you should be aware of this possibility.
                   Of course, the best solution is to avoid using the Standard Library within your TSRs. If for no other
              reason, the Standard Library routines are quite large and TSRs should be as small as possible.


18.4    The Multiplex Interrupt (INT 2Fh)
                    When installing a passive TSR, or an active TSR with passive components, you will need to choose
              some interrupt vector to patch so other programs can communicate with your passive routines. You could
              pick an interrupt vector almost at random, say int 84h, but this could lead to some compatibility problems.
              What happens if someone else is already using that interrupt vector? Sometimes, the choice of interrupt
              vector is clear. For example, if your passive TSR is extended the int 16h keyboard services, it makes sense
              to patch in to the int 16h vector and add additional functions above and beyond those already provided by
              the BIOS. On the other hand, if you are creating a driver for some brand new device for the PC, you prob-
              ably would not want to piggyback the support functions for this device on some other interrupt. Yet arbi-
              trarily picking an unused interrupt vector is risky; how many other programs out there decided to do the


Page 1034
                                                                                                      Resident Programs

             same thing? Fortunately, MS-DOS provides a solution: the multiplex interrupt. Int 2Fh provides a general
             mechanism for installing, testing the presence of, and communicating with a TSR.
                  To use the multiplex interrupt, an application places an identification value in ah and a function
             number in al and then executes an int 2Fh instruction. Each TSR in the int 2Fh chain compares the
             value in ah against its own unique identifier value. If the values match, the TSR process the command
             specified by the value in the al register. If the identification values do not match, the TSR passes control to
             the next int 2Fh handler in the chain.
                  Of course, this only reduces the problem somewhat, it doesn’t eliminate it. Sure, we don’t have to
             guess an interrupt vector number at random, but we still have to choose a random identification number.
             After all, it seems reasonable that we must choose this number before designing the TSR and any applica-
             tions that call it, after all, how will the applications know what value to load into ah if we dynamically
             assign this value when the TSR goes resident?
                  Well, there is a little trick we can play to dynamically assign TSR identifiers and let any interested
             applications determine the TSR’s ID. By convention, function zero is the “Are you there?” call. An applica-
             tion should always execute this function to determine if the TSR is actually present in memory before mak-
             ing any service requests. Normally, function zero returns a zero in al if the TSR is not present, it returns
             0FFh if it is present. However, when this function returns 0FFh it only tells you that some TSR has
             responded to your query; it does not guarantee that the TSR you are interested in is actually present in
             memory. However, by extending the convention somewhat, it is very easy to verify the presence of the
             desired TSR. Suppose the function zero call also returns a pointer to a unique identification string in the
             es:di registers. Then the code testing for the presence of a specific TSR could test this string when the
             int 2Fh call detects the presence of a TSR. the following code segment demonstrates how a TSR could
             determine if a TSR identified as “Randy’s INT 10h Extension” is present in memory; this code will also
             determine the unique identification code for that TSR, for future reference:
             ; Scan through all the possible TSR IDs. If one is installed, see if
             ; it’s the TSR we’re interested in.

                                 mov            cx, 0FFh                 ;This will be the ID number.
             IDLoop:             mov            ah, cl                   ;ID -> AH.
                                 push           cx                       ;Preserve CX across call
                                 mov            al, 0                    ;Test presence function code.
                                 int            2Fh                      ;Call multiplex interrupt.
                                 pop            cx                       ;Restore CX.
                                 cmp            al, 0                    ;Installed TSR?
                                 je             TryNext                  ;Returns zero if none there.
                                 strcmpl                                 ;See if it’s the one we want.
                                 byte           “Randy’s INT “
                                 byte           “10h Extension”,0
                                 je             Success           ;Branch off if it is ours.
             TryNext:            loop           IDLoop            ;Otherwise, try the next one.
                                 jmp            NotInstalled      ;Failure if we get to this point.

             Success:            mov            FuncID, cl               ;Save function result.
                                  .
                                  .
                                  .

             If this code succeeds, the variable FuncId contains the identification value for resident TSR. If it fails, the
             application program probably needs to abort, or otherwise ensure that it never calls the missing TSR.
                  The code above lets an application easily detect the presence of and determine the ID number for a
             specific TSR. The next question is “How do we pick the ID number for the TSR in the first place?” The next
             section will address that issue, as well as how the TSR must respond to the multiplex interrupt.


18.5   Installing a TSR
                 Although we’ve already discussed how to make a program go resident (see “DOS Memory Usage and
             TSRs” on page 1025), there are a few aspects to installing a TSR that we need to address. First, what hap-

                                                                                                                Page 1035
Chapter 18

             pens if a user installs a TSR and then tries to install it a second time without first removing the one that is
             already resident? Second, how can we assign a TSR identification number that won’t conflict with a TSR
             that is already installed? This section will address these issues.
                   The first problem to address is an attempt to reinstall a TSR program. Although one could imagine a
             type of TSR that allows multiple copies of itself in memory at one time, such TSRs are few and far in-be-
             tween. In most cases, having multiple copies of a TSR in memory will, at best, waste memory and, at
             worst, crash the system. Therefore, unless you are specifically written a TSR that allows multiple copies of
             itself in memory at one time, you should check to see if the TSR is installed before actually installing it.
             This code is identical to the code an application would use to see if the TSR is installed, the only difference
             is that the TSR should print a nasty message and refuse to go TSR if it finds a copy of itself already installed
             in memory. The following code does this:
                                 mov            cx, 0FFh
             SearchLoop:         mov            ah, cl
                                 push           cx
                                 mov            al, 0
                                 int            2Fh
                                 pop            cx
                                 cmp            al, 0
                                 je             TryNext
                                 strcmpl
                                 byte           “Randy’s INT “
                                 byte           “10h Extension”,0
                                 je             AlreadyThere
             TryNext:            loop           SearchLoop
                                 jmp            NotInstalled

             AlreadyThere: print
                           byte                 “A copy of this TSR already exists in memory”,cr,lf
                           byte                 “Aborting installation process.”,cr,lf,0
                           ExitPgm
                            .
                            .
                            .

                   In the previous section, you saw how to write some code that would allow an application to deter-
             mine the TSR ID of a specific resident program. Now we need to look at how to dynamically choose an
             identification number for the TSR, one that does not conflict with any other TSRs. This is yet another mod-
             ification to the scanning loop. In fact, we can modify the code above to do this for us. All we need to do is
             save away some ID value that does not does not have an installed TSR. We need only add a few lines to
             the above code to accomplish this:
                                 mov            FuncID, 0                 ;Initialize FuncID to zero.
                                 mov            cx, 0FFh
             SearchLoop:         mov            ah, cl
                                 push           cx
                                 mov            al, 0
                                 int            2Fh
                                 pop            cx
                                 cmp            al, 0
                                 je             TryNext
                                 strcmpl
                                 byte           “Randy’s INT “
                                 byte           “10h Extension”,0
                                 je             AlreadyThere
                                 loop           SearchLoop
                                 jmp            NotInstalled

             ; Note: presumably DS points at the resident data segment that contains
             ;       the FuncID variable. Otherwise you must modify the following to
             ;       point some segment register at the segment containing FuncID and
             ;       use the appropriate segment override on FuncID.

             TryNext:            mov            FuncID, cl                ;Save possible function ID if this
                                 loop           SearchLoop                ; identifier is not in use.
                                 jmp            NotInstalled

             AlreadyThere: print

Page 1036
                                                                                                       Resident Programs

                                byte           “A copy of this TSR already exists in memory”,cr,lf
                                byte           “Aborting installation process.”,cr,lf,0
                                ExitPgm

            NotInstalled: cmp                  FuncID, 0                  ;If there are no available IDs, this
                          jne                  GoodID                     ; will still contain zero.
                          print
                          byte                 “There are too many TSRs already installed.”,cr,lf
                          byte                 “Sorry, aborting installation process.”,cr,lf,0
                          ExitPgm

            GoodID:

            If this code gets to label “GoodID” then a previous copy of the TSR is not present in memory and the
            FuncID variable contains an unused function identifier.

                Of course, when you install your TSR in this manner, you must not forget to patch your interrupt 2Fh
            handler into the int 2Fh chain. Also, you have to write an interrupt 2Fh handler to process int 2Fh calls.
            The following is a very simple multiplex interrupt handler for the code we’ve been developing:
            FuncID              byte           0                          ;Should be in resident segment.
            OldInt2F            dword          ?                          ; Ditto.

            MyInt2F             proc           far
                                cmp            ah, cs:FuncID              ;Is this call for us?
                                je             ItsUs
                                jmp            cs:OldInt2F                ;Chain to previous guy, if not.

            ; Now decode the function value in AL:

            ItsUs:              cmp            al, 0                      ;Verify presence call?
                                jne            TryOtherFunc
                                mov            al, 0FFh                   ;Return “present” value in AL.
                                lesi           IDString                   ;Return pointer to string in es:di.
                                iret                                      ;Return to caller.
            IDString            byte           ““Randy’s INT “
                                byte           “10h Extension”,0

            ; Down here, handle other multiplex requests.
            ; This code doesn’t offer any, but here’s where they would go.
            ; Just test the value in AL to determine which function to execute.

            TryOtherFunc:
                                 .
                                 .
                                 .
                                iret
            MyInt2F             endp




18.6   Removing a TSR
                  Removing a TSR is quite a bit more difficult that installing one. There are three things the removal
            code must do in order to properly remove a TSR from memory: first, it needs to stop any pending activities
            (e.g., the TSR may have some flags set to start some activity at a future time); second it needs to restore all
            interrupt vectors to their former values; third, it needs to return all reserved memory back to DOS so other
            applications can make use of it. The primary difficulty with these three activities is that it is not always pos-
            sible to properly restore the interrupt vectors.
                 If your TSR removal code simply restores the old interrupt vector values, you may create a really big
            problem. What happens if the user runs some other TSRs after running yours and they patch into the same
            interrupt vectors as your TSR? This would produce interrupt chains that look something like the following:

            Interrupt Vector               TSR #1                TSR #1                Your TSR             Original TSR




                                                                                                                Page 1037
Chapter 18

                 If you restore the interrupt vector with your original value, you will create the following:

        Interrupt Vector              TSR #1                TSR #1             ?                      Original TSR



                 This effectively disables the TSRs that chain into your code. Worse yet, this only disables the interrupts that
                 those TSRs have in common with your TSR. the other interrupts those TSRs patch into are still active. Who
                 knows how those interrupts will behave under such circumstances?
                      One solution is to simply print an error message informing the user that they cannot remove this TSR
                 until they remove all TSRs installed prior to this one. This is a common problem with TSRs and most DOS
                 users who install and remove TSRs should be comfortable with the fact that they must remove TSRs in the
                 reverse order that they install them.
                      It would be tempting to suggest a new convention that TSRs should obey; perhaps if the function
                 number is 0FFh, a TSR should store the value in es:bx away in the interrupt vector specified in cl . This
                 would allow a TSR that would like to remove itself to pass the address of its original interrupt handler to
                 the previous TSR in the chain. There are only three problems with this approach: first, almost no TSRs in
                 existence currently support this feature, so it would be of little value; second, some TSRs might use func-
                 tion 0FFh for something else, calling them with this value, even if you knew their ID number, could create
                 a problem; finally, just because you’ve removed the TSR from the interrupt chain doesn’t mean you can
                 (truly) free up the memory the TSR uses. DOS’ memory management scheme (the free pointer business)
                 works like a stack. If there are other TSRs installed above yours in memory, most applications wouldn’t be
                 able to use the memory freed up by removing your TSR anyway.
                      Therefore, we’ll also adopt the strategy of simply informing the user that they cannot remove a TSR if
                 there are others installed in shared interrupt chains. Of course, that does bring up a good question, how
                 can we determine if there are other TSRs chained in to our interrupts? Well, this isn’t so hard. We know
                 that the 80x86’s interrupt vectors should still be pointing at our routines if we’re the last TSR run. So all
                 we’ve got to do is compare the patched interrupt vectors against the addresses of our interrupt service rou-
                 tines. If they all match, then we can safely remove our TSR from memory. If only one of them does not
                 match, then we cannot remove the TSR from memory. The following code sequence tests to see if it is
                 okay to detach a TSR containing ISRs for int 2fH and int 9:
                 ; OkayToRmv-        This routine returns the carry flag set if it is okay to
                 ;                   remove the current TSR from memory. It checks the interrupt
                 ;                   vectors for int 2F and int 9 to make sure they
                 ;                   are still pointing at our local routines.
                 ;                   This code assumes DS is pointing at the resident code’s
                 ;                   data segment.

                 OkayToRmv           proc           near
                                     push           es
                                     mov            ax, 0             ;Point ES at interrupt vector
                                     mov            es, ax            ; table.
                                     mov            ax, word ptr OldInt2F
                                     cmp            ax, es:[2fh*4]
                                     jne            CantRemove
                                     mov            ax, word ptr OldInt2F+2
                                     cmp            ax, es:[2Fh*4 + 2]
                                     jne            CantRemove

                                     mov            ax, word ptr OldInt9
                                     cmp            ax, es:[9*4]
                                     jne            CantRemove
                                     mov            ax, word ptr OldInt9+2
                                     cmp            ax, es:[9*4 + 2]
                                     jne            CantRemove

                 ; We can safely remove this TSR from memory.

                                     stc
                                     pop            es
                                     ret


Page 1038
                                                                                                      Resident Programs


            ‘ Someone else is in the way, we cannot remove this TSR.

            CantRemove:         clc
                                pop            es
                                ret
            OkayToRmv           endp

            Before the TSR attempts to remove itself, it should call a routine like this one to see if removal is possible.
                 Of course, the fact that no other TSR has chained into the same interrupts does not guarantee that
            there are not TSRs above yours in memory. However, removing the TSR in that case will not crash the sys-
            tem. True, you may not be able to reclaim the memory the TSR is using (at least until you remove the other
            TSRs), but at least the removal will not create complications.
                   To remove the TSR from memory requires two DOS calls, one to free the memory in use by the TSR
            and one to free the memory in use by the environment area assigned to the TSR. To do this, you need to
            make the DOS deallocation call (see “MS-DOS, PC-BIOS, and File I/O” on page 699). This call requires that
            you pass the segment address of the block to release in the es register. For the TSR program itself, you
            need to pass the address of the TSR’s PSP. This is one of the reasons a TSR needs to save its PSP when it
            first installs itself. The other free call you must make frees the space associated with the TSR’s environment
            block. The address of this block is at offset 2Ch in the PSP. So we should probably free it first. The follow-
            ing calls handle the job of free the memory associated with a TSR:
            ; Presumably, the PSP variable was initialized with the address of this
            ; program’s PSP before the terminate and stay resident call.

                                mov            es, PSP
                                mov            es, es:[2Ch]             ;Get address of environment block.
                                mov            ah, 49h                  ;DOS deallocate block call.
                                int            21h

                                mov            es, PSP                  ;Now free the program’s memory
                                mov            ah, 49h                  ; space.
                                int            21h


                  Some poorly-written TSRs provide no facilities to allow you to remove them from memory. If some-
            one wants remove such a TSR, they will have to reboot the PC. Obviously, this is a poor design. Any TSR
            you design for anything other than a quick test should be capable of removing itself from memory. The
            multiplex interrupt with function number one is often used for this purpose. To remove a TSR from mem-
            ory, some application program passes the TSR ID and a function number of one to the TSR. If the TSR can
            remove itself from memory, it does so and returns a value denoting success. If the TSR cannot remove
            itself from memory, it returns some sort of error condition.
                 Generally, the removal program is the TSR itself with a special parameter that tells it to remove the
            TSR currently loaded into memory. A little later this chapter presents an example of a TSR that works pre-
            cisely in this fashion (see “A Keyboard Monitor TSR” on page 1041).


18.7   Other DOS Related Issues
                 In addition to reentrancy problems with DOS, there are a few other issues your TSRs must deal with if
            they are going to make DOS calls. Although your calls might not cause DOS to reenter itself, it is quite pos-
            sible for your TSR’s DOS calls to disturb data structures in use by an executing application. These data
            structures include the application’s stack, PSP, disk transfer area (DTA), and the DOS extended error infor-
            mation record.
                 When an active or passive TSR gains control of the CPU, it is operating in the environment of the main
            (foreground) application. For example, the TSR’s return address and any values it saves on the stack are
            pushed onto the application’s stack. If the TSR does not use much stack space, this is fine, it need not
            switch stacks. However, if the TSR consumes considerable amounts of stack space because of recursive


                                                                                                               Page 1039
Chapter 18

                      calls or the allocation of local variables, the TSR should save the application’s ss and sp values and switch
                      to a local stack. Before returning, of course, the TSR should switch back to the foreground application’s
                      stack.
                            Likewise, if the TSR execute’s DOS’ get psp address call, DOS returns the address of the foreground
                      application’s PSP, not the TSR’s PSP4. The PSP contains several important address that DOS uses in the
                      event of an error. For example, the PSP contains the address of the termination handler, ctrl-break handler,
                      and critical error handler. If you do not switch the PSP from the foreground application to the TSR’s and
                      one of the exceptions occurs (e.g., someone hits control-break or a disk error occurs), the handler associ-
                      ated with the application may take over. Therefore, when making DOS calls that can result in one of these
                      conditions, you need to switch PSPs. Likewise, when your TSR returns control to the foreground applica-
                      tion, it must restore the PSP value. MS-DOS provides two functions that get and set the current PSP
                      address. The DOS Set PSP call (ah=51h) sets the current program’s PSP address to the value in the bx reg-
                      ister. The DOS Get PSP call (ah=50h) returns the current program’s PSP address in the bx register. Assum-
                      ing the transient portion of your TSR has saved it’s PSP address in the variable PSP, you switch between
                      the TSR’s PSP and the foreground application’s PSP as follows:
                      ; Assume we’ve just entered the TSR code, determined that it’s okay to
                      ; call DOS, and we’ve switch DS so that it points at our local variables.

                                              mov               ah, 51h                       ;Get application’s PSP address
                                              int               21h
                                              mov               AppPSP, bx                    ;Save application’s PSP locally.
                                              mov               bx, PSP                       ;Change system PSP to TSR’s PSP.
                                              mov               ah, 50h                       ;Set PSP call
                                              int               21h
                                               .
                                               .                                              ;TSR code
                                               .
                                              mov               bx, AppPSP                    ;Restore system PSP address to
                                              mov               ah, 50h                       ; point at application’s PSP.
                                              int               21h

                                    « clean up and return from TSR »


                            Another global data structure that DOS uses is the disk transfer area. This buffer area was used exten-
                      sively for disk I/O in DOS version 1.0. Since then, the main use for the DTA has been the find first file and
                      find next file functions (see “MS-DOS, PC-BIOS, and File I/O” on page 699). Obviously, if the application
                      is in the middle of using data in the DTA and your TSR makes a DOS call that changes the data in the DTA,
                      you will affect the operation of the foreground process. MS-DOS provides two calls that let you get and set
                      the address of the DTA. The Get DTA Address call, with ah=2Fh, returns the address of the DTA in the
                      es:bx registers. The Set DTA call (ah=1Ah) sets the DTA to the value found in the ds:dx register pair.
                      With these two calls you can save and restore the DTA as we did for the PSP address above. The DTA is
                      usually at offset 80h in the PSP, the following code preserve’s the foreground application’s DTA and sets
                      the current DTA to the TSR’s at offset PSP:80.
                      ; This code makes the same assumptions as the previous example.

                                              mov               ah, 2Fh           ;Get application DTA
                                              int               21h
                                              mov               word ptr AppDTA, bx
                                              mov               word ptr AppDTA+2, es

                                              push              ds
                                              mov               ds, PSP                       ;DTA is in PSP
                                              mov               dx, 80h                       ; at offset 80h
                                              mov               ah, 1ah                       ;Set DTA call.
                                              int               21h
                                              pop               ds
                                               .
                                               .                                              ;TSR code.
                                               .


    4. This is another reason the transient portion of the TSR must save the PSP address in a resident variable for the TSR.

Page 1040
                                                                                                       Resident Programs

                                push           ds
                                mov            dx, word ptr AppDTA
                                mov            ds, word ptr AppDTA+2
                                mov            ax, 1ah           ;Set DTA call.
                                int            21h

                 The last issue a TSR must deal with is the extended error information in DOS. If a TSR interrupts a pro-
            gram immediately after DOS returns to that program, there may be some error information the foreground
            application needs to check in the DOS extended error information. If the TSR makes any DOS calls, DOS
            may replace this information with the status of the TSR DOS call. When control returns to the foreground
            application, it may read the extended error status and get the information generated by the TSR DOS call,
            not the application’s DOS call. DOS provides two asymmetrical calls, Get Extended Error and Set
            Extended Error that read and write these values, respectively. The call to Get Extended Error returns the
            error status in the ax, bx, cx, dx, si, di, es, and ds registers. You need to save the registers in a data struc-
            ture that takes the following form:
            ExtError            struct
            eeAX                word           ?
            eeBX                word           ?
            eeCX                word           ?
            eeDX                word           ?
            eeSI                word           ?
            eeDI                word           ?
            eeDS                word           ?
            eeES                word           ?
                                word           3 dup (0)                 ;Reserved.
            ExtError            ends

                 The Set Extended Error call requires that you pass an address to this structure in the ds:si register pair
            (which is why these two calls are asymmetrical). To preserve the extended error information, you would
            use code similar to the following:
            ; Save assumptions as the above routines here. Also, assume the error
            ; data structure is named ERR and is in the same segment as this code.

                                push           ds                        ;Save ptr to our DS.
                                mov            ah, 59h                   ;Get extended error call
                                mov            bx, 0                     ;Required by this call
                                int            21h

                                mov            cs:ERR.eeDS, ds
                                pop            ds                        ;Retrieve ptr to our data.
                                mov            ERR.eeAX, ax
                                mov            ERR.eeBX, bx
                                mov            ERR.eeCX, cx
                                mov            ERR.eeDX, dx
                                mov            ERR.eeSI, si
                                mov            ERR.eeDI, di
                                mov            ERR.eeES, es
                                 .
                                 .                                       ;TSR code goes here.
                                 .
                                mov            si, offset ERR            ;DS already points at correct seg.
                                mov            ax, 5D0Ah                 ;5D0Ah is Set Extended Error code.
                                int            21h

                        « clean up and quit »




18.8   A Keyboard Monitor TSR
                  The following program extends the keystroke counter program presented a little earlier in this chap-
            ter. This particular program monitors keystrokes and each minute writes out data to a file listing the date,
            time, and approximate number of keystrokes in the last minute.


                                                                                                                Page 1041
Chapter 18

                          This program can help you discover how much time you spend typing versus thinking at a display
                     screen5.
                     ;   This is an example of an active TSR that counts keyboard interrupts
                     ;   once activated. Every minute it writes the number of keyboard
                     ;   interrupts that occurred in the previous minute to an output file.
                     ;   This continues until the user removes the program from memory.
                     ;
                     ;
                     ;   Usage:
                     ;             KEYEVAL filename                 -                 Begins logging keystroke data to
                     ;                                                                this file.
                     ;
                     ;             KEYEVAL REMOVE                   -                 Removes the resident program from
                     ;                                                                memory.
                     ;
                     ;
                     ;   This TSR checks to make sure there isn’t a copy already active in
                     ;   memory. When doing disk I/O from the interrupts, it checks to make
                     ;   sure DOS isn’t busy and it preserves application globals (PSP, DTA,
                     ;   and extended error info). When removing itself from memory, it
                     ;   makes sure there are no other interrupts chained into any of its
                     ;   interrupts before doing the remove.
                     ;
                     ;   The resident segment definitions must come before everything else.

                     ResidentSeg             segment          para public ‘Resident’
                     ResidentSeg             ends

                     EndResident             segment          para public ‘EndRes’
                     EndResident             ends

                                             .xlist
                                             .286
                                             include    stdlib.a
                                             includelib stdlib.lib
                                             .list


                     ; Resident segment that holds the TSR code:

                     ResidentSeg             segment          para public ‘Resident’
                                             assume           cs:ResidentSeg, ds:nothing

                     ; Int 2Fh ID number for this TSR:

                     MyTSRID                 byte             0

                     ; The following variable counts the number of keyboard interrupts

                     KeyIntCnt               word             0

                     ; Counter counts off the number of milliseconds that pass, SecCounter
                     ; counts off the number of seconds (up to 60).

                     Counter                 word             0
                     SecCounter              word             0

                     ; FileHandle is the handle for the log file:

                     FileHandle              word             0

                     ; NeedIO determines if we have a pending I/O opearation.

                     NeedIO                  word             0

                     ; PSP is the psp address for this program.

                     PSP                     word             0


    5. This program is intended for your personal enjoyment only, it is not intended to be used for unethical purposes such as monitoring employees for
    evaluation purposes.

Page 1042
                                                               Resident Programs

; Variables to tell us if DOS, INT 13h, or INT 16h are busy:

InInt13       byte       0
InInt16       byte       0
InDOSFlag     dword      ?

; These variables contain the original values in the interrupt vectors
; we’ve patched.

OldInt9       dword      ?
OldInt13      dword      ?
OldInt16      dword      ?
OldInt1C      dword      ?
OldInt28      dword      ?
OldInt2F      dword      ?


; DOS data structures:

ExtErr        struct
eeAX          word       ?
eeBX          word       ?
eeCX          word       ?
eeDX          word       ?
eeSI          word       ?
eeDI          word       ?
eeDS          word       ?
eeES          word       ?
              word       3 dup (0)
ExtErr        ends



XErr          ExtErr     {}            ;Extended Error Status.
AppPSP        word       ?             ;Application PSP value.
AppDTA        dword      ?             ;Application DTA address.


; The following data is the output record. After storing this data
; to these variables, the TSR writes this data to disk.

month         byte       0
day           byte       0
year          word       0
hour          byte       0
minute        byte       0
second        byte       0
Keystrokes    word       0
RecSize       =          $-month




; MyInt9-     The system calls this routine every time a keyboard
;             interrupt occus. This routine increments the
;             KeyIntCnt variable and then passes control on to the
;             original Int9 handler.

MyInt9        proc       far
              inc        ResidentSeg:KeyIntCnt
              jmp        ResidentSeg:OldInt9
MyInt9        endp




; MyInt1C-    Timer interrupt. This guy counts off 60 seconds and then
;             attempts to write a record to the output file. Of course,
;             this call has to jump through all sorts of hoops to keep
;             from reentering DOS and other problematic code.


                                                                         Page 1043
Chapter 18


             MyInt1C         proc       far
                             assume     ds:ResidentSeg

                             push       ds
                             push       es
                             pusha                          ;Save all the registers.
                             mov        ax, ResidentSeg
                             mov        ds, ax

                             pushf
                             call       OldInt1C

             ;   First things first, let’s   bump our interrupt counter so we can count
             ;   off a minute. Since we’re   getting interrupted about every 54.92549
             ;   milliseconds, let’s shoot   for a little more accuracy than 18 times
             ;   per second so the timings   don’t drift too much.

                             add        Counter, 549        ;54.9 msec per int 1C.
                             cmp        Counter, 10000      ;1 second.
                             jb         NotSecYet
                             sub        Counter, 10000
                             inc        SecCounter
             NotSecYet:


             ; If NEEDIO is not zero, then there is an I/O operation in progress.
             ; Do not disturb the output values if this is the case.

                             cli                           ;This is a critical region.
                             cmp        NeedIO, 0
                             jne        SkipSetNIO

             ; Okay, no I/O in progress, see if a minute has passed since the last
             ; time we logged the keystrokes to the file. If so, it’s time to start
             ; another I/O operation.

                             cmp        SecCounter, 60      ;One minute passed yet?
                             jb         Int1CDone
                             mov        NeedIO, 1           ;Flag need for I/O.
                             mov        ax, KeyIntCnt       ;Copy this to the output
                             shr        ax, 1               ; buffer after computing
                             mov KeyStrokes, ax             ; # of keystrokes.
                             mov        KeyIntCnt, 0        ;Reset for next minute.
                             mov        SecCounter, 0

             SkipSetNIO:     cmp        NeedIO, 1           ;Is the I/O already in
                             jne        Int1CDone           ; progress? Or done?

                             call       ChkDOSStatus        ;See if DOS/BIOS are free.
                             jnc        Int1CDone           ;Branch if busy.

                             call       DoIO                ;Do I/O if DOS is free.

             Int1CDone:      popa                           ;Restore registers and quit.
                             pop        es
                             pop        ds
                             iret
             MyInt1C         endp
                             assume     ds:nothing


             ; MyInt28-      Idle interrupt. If DOS is in a busy-wait loop waiting for
             ;               I/O to complete, it executes an int 28h instruction each
             ;               time through the loop. We can ignore the InDOS and CritErr
             ;               flags at that time, and do the I/O if the other interrupts
             ;               are free.

             MyInt28         proc       far
                             assume     ds:ResidentSeg

                             push       ds
                             push       es
                             pusha                          ;Save all the registers.


Page 1044
                                                                 Resident Programs

               mov         ax, ResidentSeg
               mov         ds, ax

               pushf                         ;Call the next INT 28h
               call        OldInt28          ; ISR in the chain.

               cmp         NeedIO, 1         ;Do we have a pending I/O?
               jne         Int28Done

               mov         al, InInt13       ;See if BIOS is busy.
               or          al, InInt16
               jne         Int28Done

               call        DoIO              ;Go do I/O if BIOS is free.

Int28Done:     popa
               pop         es
               pop         ds
               iret
MyInt28        endp
               assume      ds:nothing


; MyInt16-     This is just a wrapper for the INT 16h (keyboard trap)
;              handler.

MyInt16        proc        far
               inc         ResidentSeg:InInt16

; Call original handler:

               pushf
               call        ResidentSeg:OldInt16

; For INT 16h we need to return the flags that come from the previous call.

               pushf
               dec         ResidentSeg:InInt16
               popf
               retf        2                 ;Fake IRET to keep flags.
MyInt16        endp


; MyInt13-     This is just a wrapper for the INT 13h (disk I/O trap)
;              handler.

MyInt13        proc        far
               inc         ResidentSeg:InInt13
               pushf
               call        ResidentSeg:OldInt13
               pushf
               dec         ResidentSeg:InInt13
               popf
               retf        2                 ;Fake iret to keep flags.
MyInt13        endp


; ChkDOSStatus-            Returns with the carry clear if DOS or a BIOS routine
;                          is busy and we can’t interrupt them.

ChkDOSStatus   proc        near
               assume      ds:ResidentSeg
               les         bx, InDOSFlag
               mov         al, es:[bx]       ;Get InDOS flag.
               or          al, es:[bx-1]     ;OR with CritErr flag.
               or          al, InInt16       ;OR with our wrapper
               or          al, InInt13       ; values.
               je          Okay2Call
               clc
               ret

Okay2Call:     clc
               ret
ChkDOSStatus   endp


                                                                           Page 1045
Chapter 18

                           assume     ds:nothing


             ; PreserveDOS- Gets a copy’s of DOS’ current PSP, DTA, and extended
             ;              error information and saves this stuff. Then it sets
             ;              the PSP to our local PSP and the DTA to PSP:80h.

             PreserveDOS   proc       near
                           assume     ds:ResidentSeg

                           mov        ah, 51h            ;Get app’s PSP.
                           int        21h
                           mov        AppPSP, bx         ;Save for later

                           mov        ah, 2Fh           ;Get app’s DTA.
                           int        21h
                           mov        word ptr AppDTA, bx
                           mov        word ptr AppDTA+2, es

                           push       ds
                           mov        ah, 59h            ;Get extended err info.
                           xor        bx, bx
                           int        21h

                           mov        cs:XErr.eeDS, ds
                           pop        ds
                           mov        XErr.eeAX, ax
                           mov        XErr.eeBX, bx
                           mov        XErr.eeCX, cx
                           mov        XErr.eeDX, dx
                           mov        XErr.eeSI, si
                           mov        XErr.eeDI, di
                           mov        XErr.eeES, es

             ; Okay, point DOS’s pointers at us:

                           mov        bx, PSP
                           mov        ah, 50h            ;Set PSP.
                           int        21h

                           push       ds                 ;Set the DTA to
                           mov        ds, PSP            ; address PSP:80h
                           mov        dx, 80h
                           mov        ah, 1Ah            ;Set DTA call.
                           int        21h
                           pop        ds

                           ret
             PreserveDOS   endp
                           assume     ds:nothing



             ; RestoreDOS- Restores DOS’ important global data values back to the
             ;             application’s values.

             RestoreDOS    proc       near
                           assume     ds:ResidentSeg

                           mov        bx, AppPSP
                           mov        ah, 50h            ;Set PSP
                           int        21h

                           push       ds
                           lds        dx, AppDTA
                           mov        ah, 1Ah            ;Set DTA
                           int        21h
                           pop        ds
                           push       ds

                           mov        si, offset XErr    ;Saved extended error stuff.
                           mov        ax, 5D0Ah          ;Restore XErr call.
                           int        21h
                           pop        ds


Page 1046
                                                                      Resident Programs

              ret
RestoreDOS    endp
              assume     ds:nothing


; DoIO-       This routine processes each of the I/O operations
;             required to write data to the file.

DoIO          proc       near
              assume     ds:ResidentSeg

              mov        NeedIO, 0FFh          ;A busy flag for us.

; The following Get Date DOS call may take a while, so turn the
; interrupts back on (we’re clear of the critical section once we
; write 0FFh to NeedIO).

              sti
              call       PreserveDOS           ;Save DOS data.

              mov        ah, 2Ah               ;Get Date DOS call
              int        21h
              mov        month, dh
              mov        day, dl
              mov        year, cx

              mov        ah, 2Ch               ;Get Time DOS call
              int        21h
              mov        hour, ch
              mov        minute, cl
              mov        second, dh

              mov        ah,   40h             ;DOS Write call
              mov        bx,   FileHandle      ;Write data to this file.
              mov        cx,   RecSize         ;This many bytes.
              mov        dx,   offset month    ;Starting at this address.
              int        21h                   ;Ignore return errors (!).
              mov        ah,   68h             ;DOS Commit call
              mov        bx,   FileHandle      ;Write data to this file.
              int        21h                   ;Ignore return errors (!).

              mov        NeedIO, 0             ;Ready to start over.
              call       RestoreDOS

PhasesDone:   ret
DoIO          endp
              assume     ds:nothing



; MyInt2F-    Provides int 2Fh (multiplex interrupt) support for this
;             TSR. The multiplex interrupt recognizes the following
;             subfunctions (passed in AL):
;
;             00- Verify presence.          Returns 0FFh in AL and a pointer
;                                           to an ID string in es:di if the
;                                           TSR ID (in AH) matches this
;                                           particular TSR.
;
;             01- Remove.                   Removes the TSR from memory.
;                                           Returns 0 in AL if successful,
;                                           1 in AL if failure.

MyInt2F       proc       far
              assume     ds:nothing

              cmp        ah, MyTSRID           ;Match our TSR identifier?
              je         YepItsOurs
              jmp        OldInt2F

; Okay, we know this is our ID, now check for a verify vs. remove call.

YepItsOurs:   cmp        al, 0                 ;Verify Call
              jne        TryRmv


                                                                             Page 1047
Chapter 18

                           mov        al, 0ffh            ;Return success.
                           lesi       IDString
                           iret                           ;Return back to caller.

             IDString      byte       “Keypress Logger TSR”,0

             TryRmv:       cmp        al, 1               ;Remove call.
                           jne        IllegalOp

                           call       TstRmvable       ;See if we can remove this guy.
                           je         CanRemove        ;Branch if we can.
                           mov        ax, 1            ;Return failure for now.
                           iret

             ; Okay, they want to remove this guy *and* we can remove it from memory.
             ; Take care of all that here.

                           assume     ds:ResidentSeg

             CanRemove:    push       ds
                           push       es
                           pusha
                           cli                            ;Turn off the interrupts while
                           mov        ax,   0             ; we mess with the interrupt
                           mov        es,   ax            ; vectors.
                           mov        ax,   cs
                           mov        ds,   ax

                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt9
                           mov        es:[9*4], ax
                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt9+2
                           mov        es:[9*4 + 2], ax

                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt13
                           mov        es:[13h*4], ax
                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt13+2
                           mov        es:[13h*4 + 2], ax

                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt16
                           mov        es:[16h*4], ax
                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt16+2
                           mov        es:[16h*4 + 2], ax

                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt1C
                           mov        es:[1Ch*4], ax
                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt1C+2
                           mov        es:[1Ch*4 + 2], ax

                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt28
                           mov        es:[28h*4], ax
                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt28+2
                           mov        es:[28h*4 + 2], ax

                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt2F
                           mov        es:[2Fh*4], ax
                           mov        ax, word ptr OldInt2F+2
                           mov        es:[2Fh*4 + 2], ax


             ; Okay, with that out of the way, let’s close the file.
             ; Note: INT 2F shouldn’t have to deal with DOS busy because it’s
             ; a passive TSR call.

                           mov        ah, 3Eh             ;Close file command
                           mov        bx, FileHandle
                           int        21h

             ; Okay, one last thing before we quit- Let’s give the memory allocated
             ; to this TSR back to DOS.

                           mov        ds, PSP
                           mov        es, ds:[2Ch]        ;Ptr to environment block.
                           mov        ah, 49h             ;DOS release memory call.
                           int        21h


Page 1048
                                                                Resident Programs


              mov        ax, ds           ;Release program code space.
              mov        es, ax
              mov        ah, 49h
              int        21h

              popa
              pop        es
              pop        ds
              mov        ax, 0            ;Return Success.
              iret


; They called us with an illegal subfunction value. Try to do as little
; damage as possible.

IllegalOp:    mov        ax, 0             ;Who knows what they were thinking?
              iret
MyInt2F       endp
              assume     ds:nothing




; TstRmvable- Checks to see if we can remove this TSR from memory.
;             Returns the zero flag set if we can remove it, clear
;             otherwise.

TstRmvable    proc       near
              cli
              push       ds
              mov        ax, 0
              mov        ds, ax

              cmp        word ptr ds:[9*4], offset MyInt9
              jne        TRDone
              cmp        word ptr ds:[9*4 + 2], seg MyInt9
              jne        TRDone

              cmp        word ptr ds:[13h*4], offset MyInt13
              jne        TRDone
              cmp        word ptr ds:[13h*4 + 2], seg MyInt13
              jne        TRDone

              cmp        word ptr ds:[16h*4], offset MyInt16
              jne        TRDone
              cmp        word ptr ds:[16h*4 + 2], seg MyInt16
              jne        TRDone

              cmp        word ptr ds:[1Ch*4], offset MyInt1C
              jne        TRDone
              cmp        word ptr ds:[1Ch*4 + 2], seg MyInt1C
              jne        TRDone

              cmp        word ptr ds:[28h*4], offset MyInt28
              jne        TRDone
              cmp        word ptr ds:[28h*4 + 2], seg MyInt28
              jne        TRDone

              cmp        word ptr ds:[2Fh*4], offset MyInt2F
              jne        TRDone
              cmp        word ptr ds:[2Fh*4 + 2], seg MyInt2F
TRDone:       pop        ds
              sti
              ret
TstRmvable    endp
ResidentSeg   ends



cseg          segment    para public ‘code’
              assume     cs:cseg, ds:ResidentSeg



                                                                       Page 1049
Chapter 18

             ; SeeIfPresent-          Checks to see if our TSR is already present in memory.
             ;                        Sets the zero flag if it is, clears the zero flag if
             ;                        it is not.

             SeeIfPresent   proc      near
                            push      es
                            push      ds
                            push      di
                            mov       cx, 0ffh          ;Start with ID 0FFh.
             IDLoop:        mov       ah, cl
                            push      cx
                            mov       al, 0             ;Verify presence call.
                            int       2Fh
                            pop       cx
                            cmp       al, 0             ;Present in memory?
                            je        TryNext
                            strcmpl
                            byte      “Keypress Logger TSR”,0
                            je        Success

             TryNext:       dec       cl                ;Test USER IDs of 80h..FFh
                            js        IDLoop
                            cmp       cx, 0             ;Clear zero flag.
             Success:       pop       di
                            pop       ds
                            pop       es
                            ret
             SeeIfPresent   endp



             ; FindID-      Determines the first (well, last actually) TSR ID available
             ;              in the multiplex interrupt chain. Returns this value in
             ;              the CL register.
             ;
             ;              Returns the zero flag set if it locates an empty slot.
             ;              Returns the zero flag clear if failure.

             FindID         proc      near
                            push      es
                            push      ds
                            push      di

                            mov       cx, 0ffh          ;Start with ID 0FFh.
             IDLoop:        mov       ah, cl
                            push      cx
                            mov       al, 0             ;Verify presence call.
                            int       2Fh
                            pop       cx
                            cmp       al, 0             ;Present in memory?
                            je        Success
                            dec       cl                ;Test USER IDs of 80h..FFh
                            js        IDLoop
                            xor       cx, cx
                            cmp       cx, 1             ;Clear zero flag
             Success:       pop       di
                            pop       ds
                            pop       es
                            ret
             FindID         endp



             Main           proc
                            meminit

                            mov       ax, ResidentSeg
                            mov       ds, ax

                            mov       ah, 62h           ;Get this program’s PSP
                            int       21h               ; value.
                            mov       PSP, bx

             ; Before we do anything else, we need to check the command line


Page 1050
                                                                 Resident Programs

;   parameters. We must have either a valid filename or the
;   command “remove”. If remove appears on the command line, then remove
;   the resident copy from memory using the multiplex (2Fh) interrupt.
;   If remove is not on the command line, we’d better have a filename and
;   there had better not be a copy already loaded into memory.

                argc
                cmp        cx, 1            ;Must have exactly 1 parm.
                je         GoodParmCnt
                print
                byte       “Usage:”,cr,lf
                byte       “ KeyEval filename”,cr,lf
                byte       “or KeyEval REMOVE”,cr,lf,0
                ExitPgm


; Check for the REMOVE command.

GoodParmCnt:    mov        ax, 1
                argv
                stricmpl
                byte       “REMOVE”,0
                jne        TstPresent

                call       SeeIfPresent
                je         RemoveIt
                print
                byte       “TSR is not present in memory, cannot remove”
                byte       cr,lf,0
                ExitPgm

RemoveIt:       mov        MyTSRID, cl
                printf
                byte       “Removing TSR (ID #%d) from memory...”,0
                dword      MyTSRID

                mov        ah, cl
                mov        al, 1            ;Remove cmd, ah contains ID
                int        2Fh
                cmp        al, 1            ;Succeed?
                je         RmvFailure
                print
                byte       “removed.”,cr,lf,0
                ExitPgm

RmvFailure:     print
                byte       cr,lf
                byte       “Could not remove TSR from memory.”,cr,lf
                byte       “Try removing other TSRs in the reverse order “
                byte       “you installed them.”,cr,lf,0
                ExitPgm



; Okay, see if the TSR is already in memory. If so, abort the
; installation process.

TstPresent:     call       SeeIfPresent
                jne        GetTSRID
                print
                byte       “TSR is already present in memory.”,cr,lf
                byte       “Aborting installation process”,cr,lf,0
                ExitPgm


; Get an ID for our TSR and save it away.

GetTSRID:       call       FindID
                je         GetFileName
                print
                byte       “Too many resident TSRs, cannot install”,cr,lf,0
                ExitPgm




                                                                           Page 1051
Chapter 18

             ; Things look cool so far, check the filename and open the file.

             GetFileName:    mov        MyTSRID, cl
                             printf
                             byte       “Keypress logger TSR program”,cr,lf
                             byte       “TSR ID = %d”,cr,lf
                             byte       “Processing file:”,0
                             dword      MyTSRID

                             puts
                             putcr

                             mov        ah, 3Ch           ;Create file command.
                             mov        cx, 0             ;Normal file.
                             push       ds
                             push       es                ;Point ds:dx at name
                             pop        ds
                             mov        dx, di
                             int        21h               ;Open the file
                             jnc        GoodOpen
                             print
                             byte       “DOS error #”,0
                             puti
                             print
                             byte       “ opening file.”,cr,lf,0
                             ExitPgm

             GoodOpen:       pop        ds
                             mov        FileHandle, ax    ;Save file handle.


             InstallInts:    print
                             byte       “Installing interrupts...”,0


             ;   Patch into the INT 9, 13h, 16h, 1Ch, 28h, and 2Fh interrupt vectors.
             ;   Note that the statements above have made ResidentSeg the current data
             ;   segment, so we can store the old values directly into
             ;   the OldIntxx variables.

                             cli                          ;Turn off interrupts!
                             mov        ax, 0
                             mov        es, ax
                             mov        ax, es:[9*4]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt9, ax
                             mov        ax, es:[9*4 + 2]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt9+2, ax
                             mov        es:[9*4], offset MyInt9
                             mov        es:[9*4+2], seg ResidentSeg

                             mov        ax, es:[13h*4]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt13, ax
                             mov        ax, es:[13h*4 + 2]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt13+2, ax
                             mov        es:[13h*4], offset MyInt13
                             mov        es:[13h*4+2], seg ResidentSeg

                             mov        ax, es:[16h*4]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt16, ax
                             mov        ax, es:[16h*4 + 2]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt16+2, ax
                             mov        es:[16h*4], offset MyInt16
                             mov        es:[16h*4+2], seg ResidentSeg

                             mov        ax, es:[1Ch*4]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt1C, ax
                             mov        ax, es:[1Ch*4 + 2]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt1C+2, ax
                             mov        es:[1Ch*4], offset MyInt1C
                             mov        es:[1Ch*4+2], seg ResidentSeg

                             mov        ax, es:[28h*4]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt28, ax
                             mov        ax, es:[28h*4 + 2]


Page 1052
                                                                                      Resident Programs

                   mov            word ptr OldInt28+2, ax
                   mov            es:[28h*4], offset MyInt28
                   mov            es:[28h*4+2], seg ResidentSeg

                   mov            ax, es:[2Fh*4]
                   mov            word ptr OldInt2F, ax
                   mov            ax, es:[2Fh*4 + 2]
                   mov            word ptr OldInt2F+2, ax
                   mov            es:[2Fh*4], offset MyInt2F
                   mov            es:[2Fh*4+2], seg ResidentSeg
                   sti                              ;Okay, ints back on.

; We’re hooked up, the only thing that remains is to terminate and
; stay resident.

                   print
                   byte           “Installed.”,cr,lf,0


                   mov            dx, EndResident         ;Compute size of program.
                   sub            dx, PSP
                   mov            ax, 3100h               ;DOS TSR command.
                   int            21h
Main               endp
cseg               ends

sseg               segment        para stack ‘stack’
stk                db             1024 dup (“stack “)
sseg               ends

zzzzzzseg          segment        para public ‘zzzzzz’
LastBytes          db             16 dup (?)
zzzzzzseg          ends
                   end            Main




The following is a short little application that reads the data file produced by the above program and pro-
duces a simple report of the date, time, and keystrokes:
; This program reads the file created by the KEYEVAL.EXE TSR program.
; It displays the log containing dates, times, and number of keystrokes.

                   .xlist
                   .286
                   include    stdlib.a
                   includelib stdlib.lib
                   .list

dseg               segment        para public ‘data’

FileHandle         word           ?

month              byte           0
day                byte           0
year               word           0
hour               byte           0
minute             byte           0
second             byte           0
KeyStrokes         word           0
RecSize            =              $-month

dseg               ends




cseg               segment        para public ‘code’
                   assume         cs:cseg, ds:dseg


                                                                                               Page 1053
Chapter 18


             ; SeeIfPresent-          Checks to see if our TSR is present in memory.
             ;                        Sets the zero flag if it is, clears the zero flag if
             ;                        it is not.

             SeeIfPresent   proc      near
                            push      es
                            push      ds
                            pusha
                            mov       cx, 0ffh          ;Start with ID 0FFh.
             IDLoop:        mov       ah, cl
                            push      cx
                            mov       al, 0             ;Verify presence call.
                            int       2Fh
                            pop       cx
                            cmp       al, 0             ;Present in memory?
                            je        TryNext
                            strcmpl
                            byte      “Keypress Logger TSR”,0
                            je        Success

             TryNext:       dec       cl                ;Test USER IDs of 80h..FFh
                            js        IDLoop
                            cmp       cx, 0             ;Clear zero flag.
             Success:       popa
                            pop       ds
                            pop       es
                            ret
             SeeIfPresent   endp



             Main           proc
                            meminit

                            mov       ax, dseg
                            mov       ds, ax



                            argc
                            cmp       cx, 1             ;Must have exactly 1 parm.
                            je        GoodParmCnt
                            print
                            byte      “Usage:”,cr,lf
                            byte      “ KEYRPT filename”,cr,lf,0
                            ExitPgm



             GoodParmCnt:   mov       ax, 1
                            argv

                            print
                            byte      “Keypress logger report program”,cr,lf
                            byte      “Processing file:”,0
                            puts
                            putcr

                            mov       ah, 3Dh           ;Open file command.
                            mov       al, 0             ;Open for reading.
                            push      ds
                            push      es                ;Point ds:dx at name
                            pop       ds
                            mov       dx, di
                            int       21h               ;Open the file
                            jnc       GoodOpen
                            print
                            byte      “DOS error #”,0
                            puti
                            print
                            byte      “ opening file.”,cr,lf,0
                            ExitPgm



Page 1054
                                                                                                                        Resident Programs

                   GoodOpen:              pop              ds
                                          mov              FileHandle, ax              ;Save file handle.


                   ; Okay, read the data and display it:

                   ReadLoop:              mov              ah, 3Fh                     ;Read file command
                                          mov              bx, FileHandle
                                          mov              cx, RecSize                 ;Number of bytes.
                                          mov              dx, offset month            ;Place to put data.
                                          int              21h
                                          jc               ReadError
                                          test             ax, ax                      ;EOF?
                                          je               Quit

                                          mov              cx, year
                                          mov              dl, day
                                          mov              dh, month
                                          dtoam
                                          puts
                                          free
                                          print
                                          byte             “, “,0

                                          mov              ch,   hour
                                          mov              cl,   minute
                                          mov              dh,   second
                                          mov              dl,   0
                                          ttoam
                                          puts
                                          free
                                          printf
                                          byte             “, keystrokes = %d\n”,0
                                          dword            KeyStrokes
                                          jmp              ReadLoop

                   ReadError:             print
                                          byte             “Error reading file”,cr,lf,0

                   Quit:                  mov              bx, FileHandle
                                          mov              ah, 3Eh                     ;Close file
                                          int              21h
                                          ExitPgm

                   Main                   endp
                   cseg                   ends

                   sseg                   segment          para stack ‘stack’
                   stk                    db               1024 dup (“stack “)
                   sseg                   ends

                   zzzzzzseg              segment          para public ‘zzzzzz’
                   LastBytes              db               16 dup (?)
                   zzzzzzseg              ends
                                          end              Main




18.9    Semiresident Programs
                        A semiresident program is one that temporarily loads itself into memory, executes another program
                   (a child process), and then removes itself from memory after the child process terminates. Semiresident
                   programs behave like resident programs while the child executes, but they do not stay in memory once
                   the child terminates.
                        The main use for semiresident programs is to extend an existing application or patch an application6
                   (the child process). The nice thing about a semiresident program patch is that it does not have to modify

   6. Patching a program means to replace certain opcode bytes in the object file. Programmers apply patches to correct bugs or extend a product
   whose sources are not available.

                                                                                                                                  Page 1055
Chapter 18

             the application’s “.EXE” file directly on the disk. If for some reason the patch fails, you haven’t destroyed
             the ‘.EXE” file, you’ve only wiped out the object code in memory.
                   A semiresident application, like a TSR, has a transient and a resident part. The resident part remains in
             memory while the child process executes. The transient part initializes the program and then transfers con-
             trol to the resident part that loads the child application over the resident portion. The transient code
             patches the interrupt vectors and does all the things a TSR does except it doesn’t issue the TSR command.
             Instead, the resident program loads the application into memory and transfers control to that program.
             When the application returns control to the resident program, it exits to DOS using the standard ExitPgm
             call (ah=4Ch).
                  While the application is running, the resident code behaves like any other TSR. Unless the child pro-
             cess is aware of the semiresident program, or the semiresident program patches interrupt vectors the
             application normally uses, the semiresident program will probably be an active resident program, patch-
             ing into one or more of the hardware interrupts. Of course, all the rules that apply to active TSRs also
             apply to active semiresident programs.
                  The following is a very generic example of s semiresident program. This program, “RUN.ASM”, runs
             the application whose name and command line parameters appear as command line parameters to run. In
             other words:
             c:> run pgm.exe parm1 parm2 etc.

             is equivalent to
             pgm parm1 parm2 etc.

             Note that you must supply the “.EXE” or “.COM” extension to the program’s filename. This code begins by
             extracting the program’s filename and command line parameters from run’s command line. Run builds an
             exec structure (see “MS-DOS, PC-BIOS, and File I/O” on page 699) and then calls DOS to execute the pro-
             gram. On return, run fixes up the stack and returns to DOS.
             ; RUN.ASM - The barebones semiresident program.
             ;
             ;        Usage:
             ;              RUN <program.exe> <program’s command line>
             ;         or RUN <program.com> <program’s command line>
             ;
             ; RUN executes the specified program with the supplied command line parameters.
             ; At first, this may seem like a stupid program. After all, why not just run
             ; the program directly from DOS and skip the RUN altogether? Actually, there
             ; is a good reason for RUN-- It lets you (by modifying the RUN source file)
             ; set up some environment prior to running the program and clean up that
             ; environment after the program terminates (“environment” in this sense does
             ; not necessarily refer to the MS-DOS ENVIRONMENT area).
             ;
             ; For example, I have used this program to switch the mode of a TSR prior to
             ; executing an EXE file and then I restored the operating mode of that TSR
             ; after the program terminated.
             ;
             ; In general, you should create a new version of RUN.EXE (and, presumbably,
             ; give it a unique name) for each application you want to use this program
             ; with.
             ;
             ;
             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ;
             ;
             ; Put these segment definitions 1st because we want the Standard Library
             ; routines to load last in memory, so they wind up in the transient portion.

             CSEG                segment        para public ‘CODE’
             CSEG                ends
             SSEG                segment        para stack ‘stack’
             SSEG                ends
             ZZZZZZSEG           segment        para public ‘zzzzzzseg’
             ZZZZZZSEG           ends


Page 1056
                                                                   Resident Programs


; Includes for UCR Standard Library macros.

               include      consts.a
               include   stdin.a
               include   stdout.a
               include   misc.a
               include   memory.a
               include      strings.a

               includelib stdlib.lib


CSEG           segment     para public ‘CODE’
               assume      cs:cseg, ds:cseg


; Variables used by this program.


; MS-DOS EXEC structure.

ExecStruct     dw          0                ;Use parent’s Environment blk.
               dd          CmdLine          ;For the cmd ln parms.
               dd          DfltFCB
               dd          DfltFCB

DfltFCB        db          3,” “,0,0,0,0,0
CmdLine        db          0, 0dh, 126 dup (“ “) ;Cmd line for program.
PgmName        dd          ?                 ;Points at pgm name.




Main           proc
               mov         ax, cseg         ;Get ptr to vars segment
               mov         ds, ax

               MemInit                      ;Start the memory mgr.



; If you want to do something before the execution of the command-line
; specified program, here is a good place to do it:



;         -------------------------------------



; Now let’s fetch the program name, etc., from the command line and execute
; it.

               argc                         ;See how many cmd ln parms
               or          cx, cx           ; we have.
               jz          Quit             ;Just quit if no parameters.

               mov         ax, 1            ;Get the first parm (pgm name)
               argv
               mov         word ptr PgmName, di;Save ptr to name
               mov         word ptr PgmName+2, es


; Okay, for each word on the command line after the filename, copy
; that word to CmdLine buffer and separate each word with a space,
; just like COMMAND.COM does with command line parameters it processes.

               lea         si, CmdLine+1 ;Index into cmdline.
ParmLoop:      dec         cx
               jz          ExecutePgm

               inc         ax               ;Point at next parm.
               argv                         ;Get the next parm.

                                                                          Page 1057
Chapter 18


                             push         ax
                             mov          byte ptr [si], ‘ ‘ ;1st item and separator on ln.
                             inc          CmdLine
                             inc          si
             CpyLp:          mov          al, es:[di]
                             cmp          al, 0
                             je           StrDone
                             inc          CmdLine           ;Increment byte cnt
                             mov          ds:[si], al
                             inc          si
                             inc          di
                             jmp          CpyLp

             StrDone:        mov          byte ptr ds:[si], cr ;In case this is the end.
                             pop          ax                ;Get current parm #
                             jmp          ParmLoop


             ;   Okay, we’ve built   the MS-DOS execute structure and the necessary
             ;   command line, now   let’s see about running the program.
             ;   The first step is   to free up all the memory that this program
             ;   isn’t using. That   would be everything from zzzzzzseg on.

             ExecutePgm:     mov          ah,   62h             ;Get our PSP value
                             int          21h
                             mov          es,   bx
                             mov          ax,   zzzzzzseg       ;Compute size of
                             sub          ax,   bx              ; resident run code.
                             mov          bx,   ax
                             mov          ah,   4ah             ;Release unused memory.
                             int          21h

             ; Warning! No Standard Library calls after this point. We’ve just
             ; released the memory that they’re sitting in. So the program load
             ; we’re about to do will wipe out the Standard Library code.

                             mov          bx,   seg ExecStruct
                             mov          es,   bx
                             mov          bx,   offset ExecStruct ;Ptr to program record.
                             lds          dx,   PgmName
                             mov          ax,   4b00h         ;Exec pgm
                             int          21h

             ; When we get back, we can’t count on *anything* being correct. First, fix
             ; the stack pointer and then we can finish up anything else that needs to
             ; be done.

                             mov          ax,   sseg
                             mov          ss,   ax
                             mov          sp,   offset EndStk
                             mov          ax,   seg cseg
                             mov          ds,   ax

             ; Okay, if you have any great deeds to do after the program, this is a
             ; good place to put such stuff.

             ;          -------------------------------------

             ; Return control to MS-DOS

             Quit:           ExitPgm
             Main            endp
             cseg            ends

             sseg            segment      para stack ‘stack’
                             dw           128 dup (0)
             endstk          dw           ?
             sseg            ends

             ; Set aside some room for the heap.

             zzzzzzseg       segment      para public ‘zzzzzzseg’
             Heap            db           200h dup (?)


Page 1058
                                                                                      Resident Programs

zzzzzzseg          ends

                   end            Main




     Since RUN.ASM is rather simple perhaps a more complex example is in order. The following is a fully
functional patch for the Lucasart’s game XWING. The motivation for this patch can about because of the
annoyance of having to look up a password everytime you play the game. This little patch searches for the
code that calls the password routine and stores NOPs over that code in memory.
     The operation of this code is a little different than that of RUN.ASM. The RUN program sends an exe-
cute command to DOS that runs the desired program. All system changes RUN needs to make must be
made before or after the application executes. XWPATCH operates a little differently. It loads the
XWING.EXE program into memory and searches for some specific code (the call to the password routine).
Once it finds this code, it stores NOP instructions over the top of the call.
      Unfortunately, life isn’t quite that simple. When XWING.EXE loads, the password code isn’t yet
present in memory. XWING loads that code as an overlay later on. So the XWPATCH program finds some-
thing that XWING.EXE does load into memory right away – the joystick code. XWPATCH patches the joy-
stick code so that any call to the joystick routine (when detecting or calibrating the joystick) produces a
call to XWPATCH’s code that searches for the password code. Once XWPATCH locates and NOPs out the
call to the password routine, it restores the code in the joystick routine. From that point forward,
XWPATCH is simply taking up memory space; XWING will never call it again until XWING terminates.
; XWPATCH.ASM
;
;        Usage:
;              XWPATCH   - must be in same directory as XWING.EXE
;
; This program executes the XWING.EXE program and patches it to avoid
; having to enter the password every time you run it.
;
; This program is intended for educational purposes only.
; It is a demonstration of how to write a semiresident program.
; It is not intended as a device to allow the piracy of commercial software.
; Such use is illegal and is punishable by law.
;
; This software is offered without warranty or any expectation of
; correctness. Due to the dynamic nature of software design, programs
; that patch other programs may not work with slight changes in the
; patched program (XWING.EXE). USE THIS CODE AT YOUR OWN RISK.
;
;----------------------------------------------------------------------------


byp                textequ        <byte ptr>
wp                 textequ        <word ptr>

; Put these segment definitions here so the UCR Standard Library will
; load after zzzzzzseg (in the transient section).

cseg               segment para public ‘CODE’
cseg               ends

sseg               segment        para stack ‘STACK’
sseg               ends

zzzzzzseg          segment        para public ‘zzzzzzseg’
zzzzzzseg          ends

                   .286
                   include        stdlib.a
                   includelib stdlib.lib


CSEG               segment        para public ‘CODE’


                                                                                               Page 1059
Chapter 18

                             assume     cs:cseg, ds:nothing


             ; CountJSCalls-Number of times xwing calls the Joystick code before
             ; we patch out the password call.

             CountJSCalls    dw         250


             ; PSP-     Program Segment Prefix. Needed to free up memory before running
             ;          the real application program.

             PSP             dw         0



             ; Program Loading data structures (for DOS).

             ExecStruct      dw         0                 ;Use parent’s Environment blk.
                             dd         CmdLine           ;For the cmd ln parms.
                             dd         DfltFCB
                             dd         DfltFCB
             LoadSSSP        dd         ?
             LoadCSIP        dd         ?
             PgmName         dd         Pgm

             DfltFCB         db         3,” “,0,0,0,0,0
             CmdLine         db         2, “ “, 0dh, 16 dup (“ “);Cmd line for program
             Pgm             db         “XWING.EXE”,0


             ;****************************************************************************
             ; XWPATCH begins here. This is the memory resident part. Only put code
             ; which which has to be present at run-time or needs to be resident after
             ; freeing up memory.
             ;****************************************************************************

             Main            proc
                             mov        cs:PSP, ds
                             mov        ax, cseg          ;Get ptr to vars segment
                             mov        ds, ax

                             mov        ax, zzzzzzseg
                             mov        es, ax
                             mov        cx, 1024/16
                             meminit2


             ;   Now, free up memory from ZZZZZZSEG on to make room for XWING.
             ;   Note: Absolutely no calls to UCR Standard Library routines from
             ;   this point forward! (ExitPgm is okay, it’s just a macro which calls DOS.)
             ;   Note that after the execution of this code, none of the code & data
             ;   from zzzzzzseg on is valid.

                             mov        bx, zzzzzzseg
                             sub        bx, PSP
                             inc        bx
                             mov        es, PSP
                             mov        ah, 4ah
                             int        21h
                             jnc        GoodRealloc

             ; Okay, I lied. Here’s a StdLib call, but it’s okay because we failed
             ; to load the application over the top of the standard library code.
             ; But from this point on, absolutely no more calls!

                             print
                             byte       “Memory allocation error.”
                             byte       cr,lf,0
                             jmp        Quit

             GoodRealloc:

             ; Now load the XWING program into memory:


Page 1060
                                                                 Resident Programs


                mov        bx, seg ExecStruct
                mov        es, bx
                mov        bx, offset ExecStruct ;Ptr to program record.
                lds        dx, PgmName
                mov        ax, 4b01h         ;Load, do not exec, pgm
                int        21h
                jc         Quit              ;If error loading file.

;   Unfortunately, the password code gets loaded dynamically later on.
;   So it’s not anywhere in memory where we can search for it. But we
;   do know that the joystick code is in memory, so we’ll search for
;   that code. Once we find it, we’ll patch it so it calls our SearchPW
;   routine. Note that you must use a joystick (and have one installed)
;   for this patch to work properly.

                mov        si, zzzzzzseg
                mov        ds, si
                xor        si, si

                mov        di, cs
                mov        es, di
                mov        di, offset JoyStickCode
                mov        cx, JoyLength
                call       FindCode
                jc         Quit              ;If didn’t find joystick code.


; Patch the XWING joystick code here

                mov        byp ds:[si], 09ah;Far call
                mov        wp ds:[si+1], offset SearchPW
                mov        wp ds:[si+3], cs

; Okay, start the XWING.EXE program running

                mov        ah, 62h           ;Get PSP
                int        21h
                mov        ds, bx
                mov        es, bx
                mov        wp ds:[10], offset Quit
                mov        wp ds:[12], cs
                mov        ss, wp cseg:LoadSSSP+2
                mov        sp, wp cseg:LoadSSSP
                jmp        dword ptr cseg:LoadCSIP


Quit:           ExitPgm
Main            endp


;   SearchPW gets call from XWING when it attempts to calibrate the joystick.
;   We’ll let XWING call the joystick several hundred times before we
;   actually search for the password code. The reason we do this is because
;   XWING calls the joystick code early on to test for the presence of a
;   joystick. Once we get into the calibration code, however, it calls
;   the joystick code repetitively, so a few hundred calls doesn’t take
;   very long to expire. Once we’re in the calibration code, the password
;   code has been loaded into memory, so we can search for it then.

SearchPW        proc       far
                cmp        cs:CountJSCalls, 0
                je         DoSearch
                dec        cs:CountJSCalls
                sti                          ;Code we stole from xwing for
                neg        bx                ; the patch.
                neg        di
                ret

; Okay, search for the password code.

DoSearch:       push       bp
                mov        bp, sp
                push       ds


                                                                           Page 1061
Chapter 18

                             push     es
                             pusha

             ; Search for the password code in memory:

                             mov      si, zzzzzzseg
                             mov      ds, si
                             xor      si, si

                             mov      di, cs
                             mov      es, di
                             mov      di, offset PasswordCode
                             mov      cx, PWLength
                             call     FindCode
                             jc       NotThere          ;If didn’t find pw code.


             ; Patch the XWING password code here. Just store NOPs over the five
             ; bytes of the far call to the password routine.

                             mov      byp   ds:[si+11],   090h           ;NOP out a far call
                             mov      byp   ds:[si+12],   090h
                             mov      byp   ds:[si+13],   090h
                             mov      byp   ds:[si+14],   090h
                             mov      byp   ds:[si+15],   090h

             ; Adjust the return address and restore the patched joystick code so
             ; that it doesn’t bother jumping to us anymore.

             NotThere:       sub      word ptr [bp+2], 5 ;Back up return address.
                             les      bx, [bp+2]        ;Fetch return address.

             ; Store the original joystick code over the call we patched to this
             ; routine.

                             mov      ax, word ptr JoyStickCode
                             mov      es:[bx], ax
                             mov      ax, word ptr JoyStickCode+2
                             mov      es:[bx+2], ax
                             mov      al, byte ptr JoyStickCode+4
                             mov      es:[bx+4], al

                             popa
                             pop      es
                             pop      ds
                             pop      bp
                             ret
             SearchPW        endp

             ;****************************************************************************
             ;
             ; FindCode: On entry, ES:DI points at some code in *this* program which
             ;         appears in the XWING game. DS:SI points at a block of memory
             ;         in the XWING game. FindCode searches through memory to find the
             ;         suspect piece of code and returns DS:SI pointing at the start of
             ;         that code. This code assumes that it *will* find the code!
             ;         It returns the carry clear if it finds it, set if it doesn’t.

             FindCode        proc     near
                             push     ax
                             push     bx
                             push     dx

             DoCmp:          mov      dx, 1000h            ;Search in 4K blocks.
             CmpLoop:        push     di                   ;Save ptr to compare code.
                             push     si                   ;Save ptr to start of string.
                             push     cx                   ;Save count.
                        repe cmpsb
                             pop      cx
                             pop      si
                             pop      di
                             je       FoundCode
                             inc      si
                             dec      dx


Page 1062
                                                                  Resident Programs

               jne       CmpLoop
               sub       si, 1000h
               mov       ax, ds
               inc       ah
               mov       ds, ax
               cmp       ax, 9000h         ;Stop at address 9000:0
               jb        DoCmp             ; and fail if not found.

               pop       dx
               pop       bx
               pop       ax
               stc
               ret

FoundCode:     pop       dx
               pop       bx
               pop       ax
               clc
               ret
FindCode       endp


;****************************************************************************
;
; Call to password code that appears in the XWING game. This is actually
; data that we’re going to search for in the XWING object code.

PasswordCode   proc      near
               call      $+47h
               mov       [bp-4], ax
               mov       [bp-2], dx
               push      dx
               push      ax
               byte      9ah, 04h, 00
PasswordCode   endp
EndPW:

PWLength       =         EndPW-PasswordCode


; The following is the joystick code we’re going to search for.

JoyStickCode   proc      near
               sti
               neg       bx
               neg       di
               pop       bp
               pop       dx
               pop       cx
               ret
               mov       bp, bx
               in        al, dx
               mov       bl, al
               not       al
               and       al, ah
               jnz       $+11h
               in        al, dx
JoyStickCode   endp
EndJSC:

JoyLength      =         EndJSC-JoyStickCode
cseg           ends

sseg           segment   para stack ‘STACK’
               dw        256 dup (0)
endstk         dw        ?
sseg           ends

zzzzzzseg      segment   para public ‘zzzzzzseg’
Heap           db        1024 dup (0)
zzzzzzseg      ends
               end       Main




                                                                         Page 1063
Chapter 18


18.10 Summary
                  Resident programs provide a small amount of multitasking to DOS’ single tasking world. DOS pro-
             vides support for resident programs through a rudimentary memory management system. When an appli-
             cation issues the terminate and stay resident call, DOS adjusts its memory pointers so the memory space
             reserved by the TSR code is protected from future program loading operations. For more information on
             how this process works, see
                       •    “DOS Memory Usage and TSRs” on page 1025
                  TSRs come in two basic forms: active and passive. Passive TSRs are not self-activating. A foreground
             application must call a routine in a passive TSR to activate it. Generally, an application interfaces to a pas-
             sive TSR using the 80x86 trap mechanism (software interrupts). Active TSRs, on the other hand, do not rely
             on the foreground application for activation. Instead, they attach themselves to a hardware interrupt that
             activates them independently of the foreground process. For more information, see
                       •    “Active vs. Passive TSRs” on page 1029
                   The nature of an active TSR introduces many compatibility problems. The primary problem is that an
             active TSR might want to call a DOS or BIOS routine after having just interrupted either of these systems.
             This creates problems because DOS and BIOS are not reentrant. Fortunately, MS-DOS provides some
             hooks that give active TSRs the ability to schedule DOS calls with DOS is inactive. Although the BIOS rou-
             tines do not provide this same facility, it is easy to add a wrapper around a BIOS call to let you schedule
             calls appropriately. One additional problem with DOS is that an active TSR might disturb some global vari-
             able in use by the foreground process. Fortunately, DOS lets the TSR save and restore these values, pre-
             venting some nasty compatibility problems. For details, see
                       •    “Reentrancy” on page 1032
                       •    “Reentrancy Problems with DOS” on page 1032
                       •    “Reentrancy Problems with BIOS” on page 1033
                       •    “Reentrancy Problems with Other Code” on page 1034
                       •    “Other DOS Related Issues” on page 1039
                  MS-DOS provides a special interrupt to coordinate communication between TSRs and other applica-
             tions. The multiplex interrupt lets you easily check for the presence of a TSR in memory, remove a TSR
             from memory, or pass various information between the TSR and an active application. For more informa-
             tion, see
                       •    “The Multiplex Interrupt (INT 2Fh)” on page 1034
                  Well written TSRs follow stringent rules. In particular, a good TSR follows certain conventions during
             installation and always provide the user with a safe removal mechanism that frees all memory in use by the
             TSR. In those rare cases where a TSR cannot remove itself, it always reports an appropriate error and
             instructs the user how to solve the problem. For more information on load and removing TSRs, see
                       •    “Installing a TSR” on page 1035
                       •    “Removing a TSR” on page 1037
                       •    “A Keyboard Monitor TSR” on page 1041
                 A semiresident routine is one that is resident during the execution of some specific program. It auto-
             matically unloads itself when that application terminates. Semiresident applications find application as
             program patchers and “time-release TSRs.” For more information on semiresident programs, see
                       •    “Semiresident Programs” on page 1055




Page 1064
