The PC Parallel Ports                                                                                                       Chapter 21
                          The original IBM PC design provided support for three parallel printer ports that IBM designated
                     LPT1:, LPT2:, and LPT3:1. IBM probably envisioned machines that could support a standard dot matrix
                     printer, a daisy wheel printer, and maybe some other auxiliary type of printer for different purposes, all on
                     the same machine (laser printers were still a few years in the future at that time). Surely IBM did not antic-
                     ipate the general use that parallel ports have received or they would probably have designed them differ-
                     ently. Today, the PC’s parallel port controls keyboards, disk drives, tape drives, SCSI adapters, ethernet
                     (and other network) adapters, joystick adapters, auxiliary keypad devices, other miscellaneous devices,
                     and, oh yes, printers. This chapter will not attempt to describe how to use the parallel port for all these var-
                     ious purposes – this book is long enough already. However, a thorough discussion of how the parallel
                     interface controls a printer and one other application of the parallel port (cross machine communication)
                     should provide you with enough ideas to implement the next great parallel device.


21.1     Basic Parallel Port Information
                           There are two basic data transmission methods modern computes employ: parallel data transmission
                     and serial data transmission. In a serial data transmission scheme (see “The PC Serial Ports” on page 1223)
                     one device sends data to another a single bit at a time across one wire. In a parallel transmission scheme,
                     one device sends data to another several bits at a time (in parallel) on several different wires. For example,
                     the PC’s parallel port provides eight data lines compared to the serial port’s single data line. Therefore, it
                     would seem that the parallel port would be able to transmit data eight times as fast since there are eight
                     times as many wires in the cable. Likewise, it would seem that a serial cable, for the same price as a paral-
                     lel cable, would be able to go eight times as far since there are fewer wires in the cable. And these are the
                     common trade-offs typically given for parallel vs. serial communication methods: speed vs. cost.
                           In practice, parallel communications is not eight times faster than serial communications, nor do par-
                     allel cables cost eight times as much. In generally, those who design serial cables (.e.g, ethernet cables)
                     use higher materials and shielding. This raises the cost of the cable, but allows devices to transmit data, still
                     a bit at a time, much faster. Furthermore, the better cable design allows greater distances between devices.
                     Parallel cables, on the other hand, are generally quite inexpensive and designed for very short connec-
                     tions (generally no more than about six to ten feet). The real world problems of electrical noise and
                     cross-talk create problems when using long parallel cables and limit how fast the system can transmit data.
                     In fact the original Centronics printer port specification called for no more than 1,000 characters/second
                     data transmission rate, so many printers were designed to handle data at this transmission rate. Most paral-
                     lel ports can easily outperform this value; however, the limiting factor is still the cable, not any intrinsic
                     limitation in a modern computer.
                           Although a parallel communication system could use any number of wires to transmit data, most par-
                     allel systems use eight data lines to transmit a byte at a time. There are a few notable exceptions. For
                     example, the SCSI interface is a parallel interface, yet newer versions of the SCSI standard allow eight, six-
                     teen, and even thirty-two bit data transfers. In this chapter we will concentrate on byte-sized transfers
                     since the parallel port on the PC provides for eight-bit data.
                          A typical parallel communication system can be one way (or unidirectional ) or two way
                     (bidirectional ). The PC’s parallel port generally supports unidirectional communications (from the PC to
                     the printer), so we will consider this simpler case first.
                           In a unidirectional parallel communication system there are two distinguished sites: the transmitting
                     site and the receiving site. The transmitting site places its data on the data lines and informs the receiving
                     site that data is available; the receiving site then reads the data lines and informs the transmitting site that it


   1. In theory, the BIOS allows for a fourth parallel printer port, LPT4:, but few (if any) adapter cards have ever been built that claim to work as LPT4:.

                                                                                                                                             Page 1199

                                   Thi d              t             t d ith F           M k       402
Chapter 21

             has taken the data. Note how the two sites synchronize their access to the data lines – the receiving site
             does not read the data lines until the transmitting site tells it to, the transmitting site does not place a new
             value on the data lines until the receiving site removes the data and tells the transmitting site that it has the
             data. Handshaking is the term that describes how these two sites coordinate the data transfer.
                  To properly implement handshaking requires two additional lines. The strobe (or data strobe) line is
             what the transmitting site uses to tell the receiving site that data is available. The acknowledge line is what
             the receiving site uses to tell the transmitting site that it has taken the data and is ready for more. The PC’s
             parallel port actually provides a third handshaking line, busy, that the receiving site can use to tell the
             transmitting site that it is busy and the transmitting site should not attempt to send data. A typical data
             transmission session looks something like the following:
             Transmitting site:
             1)        The transmitting site checks the busy line to see if the receiving is busy. If the busy line is active,
                       the transmitter waits in a loop until the busy line becomes inactive.
             2)        The transmitting site places its data on the data lines.
             3)        The transmitting site activates the strobe line.
             4)        The transmitting site waits in a loop for the acknowledge line to become active.
             5)        The transmitting site sets the strobe inactive.
             6)        The transmitting site waits in a loop for the acknowledge line to become inactive.
             7)        The transmitting site repeats steps one through six for each byte it must transmit.


             Receiving site:
             1)        The receiving site sets the busy line inactive (assuming it is ready to accept data).
             2)        The receiving site waits in a loop until the strobe line becomes active.
             3)        The receiving site reads the data from the data lines (and processes the data, if necessary).
             4)        The receiving site activates the acknowledge line.
             5)        The receiving site waits in a loop until the strobe line goes inactive.
             6)        The receiving site sets the acknowledge line inactive.
             7)        The receiving site repeats steps one through six for each additional byte it must receive.


             By carefully following these steps, the receiving and transmitting sites carefully coordinate their actions so
             the transmitting site doesn’t attempt to put several bytes on the data lines before the receiving site con-
             sumes them and the receiving site doesn’t attempt to read data that the transmitting site has not sent.
                   Bidirectional data transmission is often nothing more than two unidirectional data transfers with the
             roles of the transmitting and receiving sites reversed for the second communication channel. Some PC par-
             allel ports (particularly on PS/2 systems and many notebooks) provide a bidirectional parallel port. Bidi-
             rectional data transmission on such hardware is slightly more complex than on systems that implement
             bidirectional communication with two unidirectional ports. Bidirectional communication on a bidirec-
             tional parallel port requires an extra set of control lines so the two sites can determine who is writing to the
             common data lines at any one time.




Page 1200
                                                                                                        The PC Parallel Ports


21.2   The Parallel Port Hardware
                   The standard unidirectional parallel port on the PC provides more than the 11 lines described in the
               previous section (eight data, three handshake). The PC’s parallel port provides the following signals:


                                          Table 79: Parallel Port Signals
   Pin Number on       I/O          Active    Signal
     Connector      Direction      Polarity   Description
         1           output           0       Strobe (data available signal).
        2-9          output           -       Data lines (bit 0 is pin 2, bit 7 is pin 9).
        10            input           0       Acknowledge line (active when remote system has taken data).
        11            input           0       Busy line (when active, remote system is busy and cannot accept data).
        12            input           1       Out of paper (when active, printer is out of paper).
        13            input           1       Select. When active, the printer is selected.
        14           output           0       Autofeed. When active, the printer automatically inserts a line feed after
                                              every carriage return it receives.
        15            input           0       Error. When active, there is a printer error.
        16           output           0       Init. When held active for at least 50 µsec, this signal causes the printer to
                                              initialize itself.
        17           output           0       Select input. This signal, when inactive, forces the printer off-line
       18-25             -            -       Signal ground.

                    Note that the parallel port provides 12 output lines (eight data lines, strobe, autofeed, init, and select
               input) and five input lines (acknowledge, busy, out of paper, select, and error). Even though the port is
               unidirectional, there is a good mixture of input and output lines available on the port. Many devices (like
               disk and tape drives) that require bidirectional data transfer use these extra lines to perform bidirectional
               data transfer.
                    On bidirectional parallel ports (found on PS/2 and laptop systems), the strobe and data lines are both
               input and output lines. There is a bit in a control register associated with the parallel port that selects the
               transfer direction at any one given instant (you cannot transfer data in both direction simultaneously).
                    There are three I/O addresses associated with a typical PC compatible parallel port. These addresses
               belong to the data register, the status register, and the control register. The data register is an eight-bit
               read/write port. Reading the data register (in a unidirectional mode) returns the value last written to the
               data register. The control and status registers provide the interface to the other I/O lines. The organization
               of these ports is as follows:
               7     6       5    4       3   2     1       0


                                                                    Unused
                                                                    Printer ackon PS/2 systems (active if zero)
                                                                    Device error (active if zero)
                                                                    Device selected (selected if one)
                                                                    Device out of paper (out of paper if one)
                                                                    Printer acknowledge (ack if zero)
                                                                    Printer busy (busy if zero)
                                 Parallel Port Status Register (read only)

                                                                                                                  Page 1201
Chapter 21

                      Bit two (printer acknowledge) is available only on PS/2 and other systems that support a bidirectional
                      printer port. Other systems do not use this bit.


                      7      6      5       4      3       2       1       0


                                                                                     Strobe (data available = 1)
                                                                                     Autofeed (add linefeed = 1)
                                                                                     Init (initialize printer = 0)
                                                                                     Select input (On-line = 1)
                                                                                     Enable parallel port IRQ (active if 1)
                                                                                     PS/2 Data direction (output = 0, input = 1)
                                                                                     Unused
                                                Parallel Port Control Register
                      The parallel port control register is an output register. Reading this location returns the last value written to
                      the control register except for bit five that is write only. Bit five, the data direction bit, is available only on
                      PS/2 and other systems that support a bidirectional parallel port. If you write a zero to this bit, the strobe
                      and data lines are output bits, just like on the unidirectional parallel port. If you write a one to this bit, then
                      the data and strobe lines are inputs. Note that in the input mode (bit 5 = 1), bit zero of the control register
                      is actually an input. Note: writing a one to bit four of the control register enables the printer IRQ (IRQ 7).
                      However, this feature does not work on all systems so very few programs attempt to use interrupts with
                      the parallel port. When active, the parallel port will generate an int 0Fh whenever the printer acknowl-
                      edges a data transmission.
                           Since the PC supports up to three separate parallel ports, there could be as many as three sets of these
                      parallel port registers in the system at any one time. There are three parallel port base addresses associ-
                      ated with the three possible parallel ports: 3BCh, 378h, and 278h. We will refer to these as the base
                      addresses for LPT1:, LPT2:, and LPT3:, respectively. The parallel port data register is always located at the
                      base address for a parallel port, the status register appears at the base address plus one, and the control
                      register appears at the base address plus two. For example, for LPT1:, the data register is at I/O address
                      3BCh, the status register is at I/O address 3BDh, and the control register is at I/O address 3BEh.
                           There is one minor glitch. The I/O addresses for LPT1:, LPT2:, and LPT3: given above are the physical
                      addresses for the parallel ports. The BIOS provides logical addresses for these parallel ports as well. This
                      lets users remap their printers (since most software only writes to LPT1:). To accomplish this, the BIOS
                      reserves eight bytes in the BIOS variable space (40:8, 40:0A, 40:0C, and 40:0E). Location 40:8 contains the
                      base address for logical LPT1:, location 40:0A contains the base address for logical LPT2:, etc. When soft-
                      ware accesses LPT1:, LPT2:, etc., it generally accesses the parallel port whose base address appears in one
                      of these locations.


21.3      Controlling a Printer Through the Parallel Port
                           Although there are many devices that connect to the PC’s parallel port, printers still make up the vast
                      number of such connections. Therefore, describing how to control a printer from the PC’s parallel port is
                      probably the best first example to present. As with the keyboard, your software can operate at three differ-
                      ent levels: it can print data using DOS, using BIOS, or by writing directly to the parallel port hardware. As
                      with the keyboard interface, using DOS or BIOS is the best approach if you want to maintain compatibility
                      with other devices that plug into the parallel port2. Of course, if you are controlling some other type of

    2. Many devices connect to the parallel port with a pass-through plug allowing you to use that device and still use the parallel port for your printer.
    However, if you talk directly to the parallel port with your software, it may conflict with that device’s operation.

Page 1202
                                                                                                    The PC Parallel Ports

            device, going directly to the hardware is your only choice. However, the BIOS provides good printer sup-
            port, so going directly to the hardware is rarely necessary if you simply want to send data to the printer.


21.3.1 Printing via DOS
                 MS-DOS provides two calls you can use to send data to the printer. DOS function 05h writes the char-
            acter in the dl register directly to the printer. Function 40h, with a file handle of 04h, also sends data to the
            printer. Since the chapter on DOS and BIOS fully describes these functions, we will not discuss them any
            further here. For more information, see “MS-DOS, PC-BIOS, and File I/O” on page 699 .


21.3.2 Printing via BIOS
                 Although DOS provides a reasonable set of functions to send characters to the printer, it does not pro-
            vide functions to let you initialize the printer or obtain the current printer status. Furthermore, DOS only
            prints to LPT1:. The PC’s int 17h BIOS routine provides three functions, print, initialize, and status. You
            can apply these functions to any supported parallel port on the system. The print function is roughly
            equivalent to DOS’ print character function. The initialize function initializes the printer using system
            dependent timing information. The printer status returns the information from the printer status port along
            with time-out information. For more information on these routines, see “MS-DOS, PC-BIOS, and File I/O”
            on page 699.


21.3.3 An INT 17h Interrupt Service Routine
                 Perhaps the best way to see how the BIOS functions operate is to write a replacement int 17h ISR for
            a printer. This section explains the handshaking protocol and variables the printer driver uses. It also
            describes the operation and return results associated with each machine.
                There are eight variables in the BIOS variable space (segment 40h) the printer driver uses. The fol-
            lowing table describes each of these variables:


                             Table 80: BIOS Parallel Port Variables
            Address       Description
              40:08       Base address of LPT1: device.
              40:0A       Base address of LPT2: device.
              40:0C       Base address of LPT3: device.
              40:0E       Base address of LPT4: device.
              40:78       LPT1: time-out value. The printer port driver software should return an
                          error if the printer device does not respond in a reasonable amount of
                          time. This variable (if non-zero) determines how many loops of 65,536
                          iterations each a driver will wait for a printer acknowledge. If zero, the
                          driver will wait forever.
              40:79       LPT2: time-out value. See description above.
              40:7A       LPT3: time-out value. See description above.
              40:7B       LPT4: time-out value. See description above.

                You will notice a slight deviation in the handshake protocol in the following code. This printer driver
            does not wait for an acknowledge from the printer after sending a character. Instead, it checks to see if

                                                                                                                Page 1203
Chapter 21

             the printer has sent an acknowledge to the previous character before sending a character. This saves a
             small amount of time because the program printer then characters can continue to operating in parallel
             with the receipt of the acknowledge from the printer. You will also notice that this particular driver does
             not monitor the busy lines. Almost every printer in existence leaves this line inactive (not busy), so there is
             no need to check it. If you encounter a printer than does manipulate the busy line, the modification to this
             code is trivial. The following code implements the int 17h service:
             ;   INT17.ASM
             ;
             ;   A short passive TSR that replaces the BIOS’ int 17h handler.
             ;   This routine demonstrates the function of each of the int 17h
             ;   functions that a standard BIOS would provide.
             ;
             ;   Note that this code does not patch into int 2Fh (multiplex interrupt)
             ;   nor can you remove this code from memory except by rebooting.
             ;   If you want to be able to do these two things (as well as check for
             ;   a previous installation), see the chapter on resident programs. Such
             ;   code was omitted from this program because of length constraints.
             ;
             ;
             ;   cseg and EndResident must occur before the standard library segments!

             cseg                  segment      para public ‘code’
             cseg                  ends

             ; Marker segment, to find the end of the resident section.

             EndResident           segment      para public ‘Resident’
             EndResident           ends

                                   .xlist
                                   include    stdlib.a
                                   includelib stdlib.lib
                                   .list


             byp                   equ          <byte ptr>

             cseg                  segment      para public ‘code’
                                   assume       cs:cseg, ds:cseg

             OldInt17              dword        ?


             ; BIOS variables:

             PrtrBase              equ          8
             PrtrTimeOut           equ          78h




             ;   This code handles the INT 17H operation. INT 17H is the BIOS routine
             ;   to send data to the printer and report on the printer’s status. There
             ;   are three different calls to this routine, depending on the contents
             ;   of the AH register. The DX register contains the printer port number.
             ;
             ;   DX=0   --   Use   LPT1:
             ;   DX=1   --   Use   LPT2:
             ;   DX=2   --   Use   LPT3:
             ;   DX=3   --   Use   LPT4:
             ;
             ;   AH=0 --           Print the character in AL to the printer. Printer status is
             ;                     returned in AH. If bit #0 = 1 then a timeout error occurred.
             ;
             ;   AH=1 --           Initialize printer. Status is returned in AH.
             ;
             ;   AH=2 --           Return printer status in AH.
             ;
             ;
             ;   The status bits returned in AH are as follows:
             ;


Page 1204
                                                               The PC Parallel Ports

;   Bit   Function                       Non-error values
;   ---   --------------------------     ----------------
;    0    1=time out error                   0
;    1    unused                             x
;    2    unused                             x
;    3    1=I/O error                        0
;    4    1=selected, 0=deselected.          1
;    5    1=out of paper                     0
;    6    1=acknowledge                      x
;    7    1=not busy                         x
;
;   Note that the hardware returns bit 3 with zero if an error has occurred,
;   with one if there is no error. The software normally inverts this bit
;   before returning it to the caller.
;
;
;   Printer port hardware locations:
;
;   There are three ports used by the printer hardware:
;
;   PrtrPortAdrs ---       Output port where data is sent to printer (8 bits).
;   PrtrPortAdrs+1 ---     Input port where printer status can be read (8 bits).
;   PrtrPortAdrs+2 ---     Output port where control information is sent to the
;                          printer.
;
;   Data output port- 8-bit data is transmitted to the printer via this port.
;
;   Input status port:
;               bit 0:     unused.
;               bit 1:     unused.
;               bit 2:     unused.
;
;               bit 3:     -Error, normally this bit means that the
;                          printer has encountered an error. However,
;                          with the P101 installed this is a data
;                          return line for the keyboard scan.
;
;               bit 4:     +SLCT, normally this bit is used to determine
;                          if the printer is selected or not. With the
;                          P101 installed this is a data return
;                          line for the keyboard scan.
;
;               bit 5:     +PE, a 1 in this bit location means that the
;                          printer has detected the end of paper. On
;                          many printer ports, this bit has been found
;                          to be inoperative.
;
;               bit 6:     -ACK, A zero in this bit position means that
;                          the printer has accepted the last character
;                          and is ready to accept another. This bit
;                          is not normally used by the BIOS as bit 7
;                          also provides this function (and more).
;
;               bit 7:     -Busy, When this signal is active (0) the
;                          printer is busy and cannot accept data.
;                          When this bit is set to one, the printer
;                          can accept another character.
;
;
;
;   Output control port:
;
;               Bit 0:     +Strobe, A 0.5 us (minimum) active high pulse
;                          on this bit clocks the data latched into the
;                          printer data output port to the printer.
;
;               Bit 1:     +Auto FD XT - A 1 stored at this bit causes
;                          the printer to line feed after a line is
;                          printed. On some printer interfaces (e.g.,
;                          the Hercules Graphics Card) this bit is
;                          inoperative.
;
;               Bit 2:     -INIT, a zero on this bit (for a minimum of
;                          50 us) will cause the printer to (re)init-


                                                                           Page 1205
Chapter 21

             ;                        ialize itself.
             ;
             ;              Bit 3:    +SLCT IN, a one in this bit selects the
             ;                        printer. A zero will cause the printer to
             ;                        go off-line.
             ;
             ;              Bit 4:    +IRQ ENABLE, a one in this bit position
             ;                        allows an interrupt to occur when -ACK
             ;                        changes from one to zero.
             ;
             ;              Bit 5:    Direction control on BI-DIR port. 0=output,
             ;                        1=input.
             ;              Bit 6:    reserved, must be zero.
             ;              Bit 7:    reserved, must be zero.

             MyInt17        proc      far
                            assume    ds:nothing

                            push      ds
                            push      bx
                            push      cx
                            push      dx

                            mov       bx, 40h            ;Point DS at BIOS vars.
                            mov       ds, bx

                            cmp       dx, 3              ;Must be LPT1..LPT4.
                            ja        InvalidPrtr

                            cmp       ah, 0              ;Branch to the appropriate code for
                            jz        PrtChar            ; the printer function
                            cmp       ah, 2
                            jb        PrtrInit
                            je        PrtrStatus

             ; If they passed us an opcode we don’t know about, just return.

             InvalidPrtr:   jmp       ISR17Done



             ; Initialize the printer by pulsing the init line for at least 50 us.
             ; The delay loop below will delay well beyond 50 usec even on the fastest
             ; machines.

             PrtrInit:      mov       bx, dx             ;Get printer port value.
                            shl       bx, 1              ;Convert to byte index.
                            mov       dx, PrtrBase[bx]   ;Get printer base address.
                            test      dx, dx             ;Does this printer exist?
                            je        InvalidPrtr        ;Quit if no such printer.
                            add       dx, 2              ;Point dx at control reg.
                            in        al, dx             ;Read current status.
                            and       al, 11011011b      ;Clear INIT/BIDIR bits.
                            out       dx, al             ;Reset printer.
                            mov       cx, 0              ;This will produce at least
             PIDelay:       loop      PIDelay            ; a 50 usec delay.
                            or        al, 100b           ;Stop resetting printer.
                            out       dx, al
                            jmp       ISR17Done


             ; Return the current printer status. This code reads the printer status
             ; port and formats the bits for return to the calling code.

             PrtrStatus:    mov       bx, dx             ;Get printer port value.
                            shl       bx, 1              ;Convert to byte index.
                            mov       dx, PrtrBase[bx]   ;Base address of printer port.
                            mov       al, 00101001b      ;Dflt: every possible error.
                            test      dx, dx             ;Does this printer exist?
                            je        InvalidPrtr        ;Quit if no such printer.
                            inc       dx                 ;Point at status port.
                            in        al, dx             ;Read status port.
                            and       al, 11111000b      ;Clear unused/timeout bits.
                            jmp       ISR17Done


Page 1206
                                                                The PC Parallel Ports



; Print the character in the accumulator!

PrtChar:        mov        bx, dx
                mov        cl, PrtrTimeOut[bx] ;Get time out value.
                shl        bx, 1             ;Convert to byte index.
                mov        dx, PrtrBase[bx] ;Get Printer port address
                or         dx, dx            ;Non-nil pointer?
                jz         NoPrtr2           ; Branch if a nil ptr

;   The following code checks to see if an acknowlege was received from
;   the printer. If this code waits too long, a time-out error is returned.
;   Acknowlege is supplied in bit #7 of the printer status port (which is
;   the next address after the printer data port).

                push       ax
                inc        dx                ;Point at status port
                mov        bl, cl            ;Put timeout value in bl
                mov        bh, cl            ; and bh.
WaitLp1:        xor        cx, cx            ;Init count to 65536.
WaitLp2:        in         al, dx            ;Read status port
                mov        ah, al            ;Save status for now.
                test       al, 80h           ;Printer acknowledge?
                jnz        GotAck            ;Branch if acknowledge.
                loop       WaitLp2           ;Repeat 65536 times.
                dec        bl                ;Decrement time out value.
                jnz        WaitLp1           ;Repeat 65536*TimeOut times.

; See if the user has selected no timeout:

                cmp        bh, 0
                je         WaitLp1

;   TIMEOUT ERROR HAS OCCURRED!
;
;   A timeout - I/O error is returned to the system at this point.
;   Either we fall through to this point from above (time out error) or
;   the referenced printer port doesn’t exist. In any case, return an error.

NoPrtr2:        or         ah, 9             ;Set timeout-I/O error flags
                and        ah, 0F9h          ;Turn off unused flags.
                xor        ah, 40h           ;Flip busy bit.

; Okay, restore registers and return to caller.

                pop        cx                ;Remove old ax.
                mov        al, cl            ;Restore old al.
                jmp        ISR17Done


; If the printer port exists and we’ve received an acknowlege, then it’s
; okay to transmit data to the printer. That job is handled down here.

GotAck:         mov        cx, 16            ;Short delay if crazy prtr
GALp:           loop       GALp              ; needs hold time after ack.
                pop        ax                ;Get char to output and
                push       ax                ; save again.
                dec        dx                ;Point DX at printer port.
                pushf                        ;Turn off interrupts for now.
                cli
                out        dx, al            ;Output data to the printer.

;   The following short delay gives the data time to travel through the
;   parallel lines. This makes sure the data arrives at the printer before
;   the strobe (the times can vary depending upon the capacitance of the
;   parallel cable’s lines).

              mov          cx, 16            ;Give data time to settle
DataSettleLp: loop         DataSettleLp      ; before sending strobe.

; Now that the data has been latched on the printer data output port, a
; strobe must be sent to the printer. The strobe line is connected to


                                                                          Page 1207
Chapter 21

             ;   bit zero of the control port. Also note that this clears bit 5 of the
             ;   control port. This ensures that the port continues to operate as an
             ;   output port if it is a bidirectional device. This code also clears bits
             ;   six and seven which IBM claims should be left zero.

                             inc        dx               ;Point DX at the printer
                             inc        dx               ; control output port.
                             in         al, dx           ;Get current control bits.
                             and        al, 01eh         ;Force strobe line to zero and
                             out        dx, al           ; make sure it’s an output port.


                             mov        cx, 16           ;Short delay to allow data
             Delay0:         loop       Delay0           ; to become good.

                             or         al, 1            ;Send out the (+) strobe.
                             out        dx, al           ;Output (+) strobe to bit 0

                             mov        cx, 16           ;Short delay to lengthen strobe
             StrobeDelay:    loop       StrobeDelay

                             and        al, 0FEh         ;Clear the strobe bit.
                             out        dx, al           ;Output to control port.
                             popf                        ;Restore interrupts.

                             pop        dx               ;Get old AX value
                             mov        al, dl           ;Restore old AL value

             ISR17Done:      pop        dx
                             pop        cx
                             pop        bx
                             pop        ds
                             iret
             MyInt17         endp


             Main            proc

                             mov        ax, cseg
                             mov        ds, ax

                             print
                             byte       “INT 17h Replacement”,cr,lf
                             byte       “Installing....”,cr,lf,0

             ;   Patch into the INT 17 interrupt vector. Note that the
             ;   statements above have made cseg the current data segment,
             ;   so we can store the old INT 17 value directly into
             ;   the OldInt17 variable.

                             cli                          ;Turn off interrupts!
                             mov        ax, 0
                             mov        es, ax
                             mov        ax, es:[17h*4]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt17, ax
                             mov        ax, es:[17h*4 + 2]
                             mov        word ptr OldInt17+2, ax
                             mov        es:[17h*4], offset MyInt17
                             mov        es:[17h*4+2], cs
                             sti                          ;Okay, ints back on.


             ; We’re hooked up, the only thing that remains is to terminate and
             ; stay resident.

                             print
                             byte       “Installed.”,cr,lf,0

                             mov        ah, 62h          ;Get this program’s PSP
                             int        21h              ; value.

                             mov        dx, EndResident;Compute size of program.
                             sub        dx, bx
                             mov        ax, 3100h         ;DOS TSR command.


Page 1208
                                                                                                   The PC Parallel Ports

                                    int        21h
            Main                    endp
            cseg                    ends

            sseg                    segment    para stack ‘stack’
            stk                     byte       1024 dup (“stack “)
            sseg                    ends

            zzzzzzseg               segment    para public ‘zzzzzz’
            LastBytes               byte       16 dup (?)
            zzzzzzseg               ends
                                    end        Main




21.4   Inter-Computer Communications on the Parallel Port
                  Although printing is, by far, the most popular use for the parallel port on a PC, many devices use the
            parallel port for other purposes, as mentioned earlier. It would not be fitting to close this chapter without
            at least one example of a non-printer application for the parallel port. This section will describe how to get
            two computers to transmit files from one to the other across the parallel port.
                 The Laplinkprogram from Travelling Software is a good example of a commercial product that can
            transfer data across the PC’s parallel port; although the following software is not as robust or feature laden
            as Laplink, it does demonstrate the basic principles behind such software.
                 Note that you cannot connect two computer’s parallel ports with a simple cable that has DB25 con-
            nectors at each end. In fact, doing so could damage the computers’ parallel ports because you’d be con-
            necting digital outputs to digital outputs (a real no-no). However, you purchase “Laplink compatible”
            cables (or buy real Laplink cables for that matter) the provide proper connections between the parallel
            ports of two computers. As you may recall from the section on the parallel port hardware, the unidirec-
            tional parallel port provides five input signals. A Laplink cable routes four of the data lines to four of these
            input lines in both directions. The connections on a Laplink compatible cable are as follows:


                        Transmitting Site                            Receiving Site

                       Data bit 4                                              Busy (inverted)

                       Data bit 3                                              Acknowledge

                       Data bit 2                                              Paper Empty

                       Data bit 1                                              Select

                       Data bit 0                                              Error


                               Connections on a Laplink Compatible Cable
                 Data written on bits zero through three of the data register at the transmitting site appear, unchanged,
            on bits three through six of the status port on the receiving site. Bit four of the transmitting site appears,
            inverted, at bit seven of the receiving site. Note that Laplink compatible cables are bidirectional. That is,
            you can transmit data from either site to the other using the connections above. However, since there are
            only five input bits on the parallel port, you must transfer the data four bits at a time (we need one bit for
            the data strobe). Since the receiving site needs to acknowledge data transmissions, we cannot simulta-
            neously transmit data in both directions. We must use one of the output lines at the site receiving data to
            acknowledge the incoming data.




                                                                                                                Page 1209
Chapter 21

                  Since the two sites cooperating in a data transfer across the parallel cable must take turns transmitting
             and receiving data, we must develop a protocol so each participant in the data transfer knows when it is
             okay to transmit and receive. Our protocol will be very simple – a site is either a transmitter or a receiver,
             the roles will never switch. Designing a more complex protocol is not difficult, but this simple protocol
             will suffice for the example you are about to see. Later in this section we will discuss ways to develop a
             protocol that allows two-way transmissions.
                   The following example programs will transmit and receive a single file across the parallel port. To use
             this software, you run the transmit program on the transmitting site and the receive program on the
             receiving site. The transmission program fetches a file name from the DOS command line and opens that
             file for reading (generating an error, and quitting, if the file does not exist). Assuming the file exists, the
             transmit program then queries the receiving site to see if it is available. The transmitter checks for the pres-
             ence of the receiving site by alternately writing zeros and ones to all output bits then reading its input bits.
             The receiving site will invert these values and write them back when it comes on-line. Note that the order
             of execution (transmitter first or receiver first) does not matter. The two programs will attempt to hand-
             shake until the other comes on line.When both sites cycle through the inverting values three times, they
             write the value 05h to their output ports to tell the other site they are ready to proceed. A time-out function
             aborts either program if the other site does not respond in a reasonable amount of time.
                  Once the two sites are synchronized, the transmitting site determines the size of the file and then
             transmits the file name and size to the receiving site. The receiving site then begins waiting for the receipt
             of data.
                  The transmitting site sends the data 512 bytes at a time to the receiving site. After the transmission of
             512 bytes, the receiving site delays sending an acknowledgment and writes the 512 bytes of data to the
             disk. Then the receiving site sends the acknowledge and the transmitting site begins sending the next 512
             bytes. This process repeats until the receiving site has accepted all the bytes from the file.
                  Here is the code for the transmitter:
             ;   TRANSMIT.ASM
             ;
             ;   This program is the transmitter portion of the programs that transmit files
             ;   across a Laplink compatible parallel cable.
             ;
             ;   This program assumes that the user want to use LPT1: for transmission.
             ;   Adjust the equates, or read the port from the command line if this
             ;   is inappropriate.

                                 .286
                                 .xlist
                                 include    stdlib.a
                                 includelib stdlib.lib
                                 .list


             dseg                segment        para public ‘data’

             TimeOutConst        equ            4000                      ;About 1 min on 66Mhz 486.
             PrtrBase            equ            10                        ;Offset to LPT1: adrs.

             MyPortAdrs          word           ?                        ;Holds printer port address.
             FileHandle          word           ?                        ;Handle for output file.
             FileBuffer          byte           512 dup (?)          ;Buffer for incoming data.

             FileSize dword ?                                       ;Size of incoming file.
             FileNamePtr    dword               ?                       ;Holds ptr to filename

             dseg                ends

             cseg                segment        para public ‘code’
                                 assume         cs:cseg, ds:dseg


             ; TestAbort-        Check to see if the user has pressed ctrl-C and wants to
             ;                   abort this program. This routine calls BIOS to see if the


Page 1210
                                                                  The PC Parallel Ports

;               user has pressed a key. If so, it calls DOS to read the
;               key (function AH=8, read a key w/o echo and with ctrl-C
;               checking).

TestAbort       proc       near
                push       ax
                push       cx
                push       dx
                mov        ah, 1
                int        16h                 ;See if keypress.
                je         NoKeyPress          ;Return if no keypress.
                mov        ah, 8               ;Read char, chk for ctrl-C.
                int        21h                 ;DOS aborts if ctrl-C.
NoKeyPress:     pop        dx
                pop        cx
                pop        ax
                ret
TestAbort       endp



; SendByte-     Transmit the byte in AL to the receiving site four bits
;               at a time.

SendByte        proc       near
                push       cx
                push       dx
                mov        ah, al              ;Save byte to xmit.

                mov        dx, MyPortAdrs      ;Base address of LPT1: port.

; First, just to be sure, write a zero to bit #4. This reads as a one
; in the busy bit of the receiver.

                mov        al, 0
                out        dx, al              ;Data not ready yet.

;   Wait until the receiver is not busy. The receiver will write a zero
;   to bit #4 of its data register while it is busy. This comes out as a
;   one in our busy bit (bit 7 of the status register). This loop waits
;   until the receiver tells us its ready to receive data by writing a
;   one to bit #4 (which we read as a zero). Note that we check for a
;   ctrl-C every so often in the event the user wants to abort the
;   transmission.

              inc          dx                  ;Point at status register.
W4NBLp:       mov          cx, 10000
Wait4NotBusy: in           al, dx              ;Read status register value.
              test         al, 80h             ;Bit 7 = 1 if busy.
              loopne       Wait4NotBusy        ;Repeat while busy, 10000 times.
              je           ItsNotbusy          ;Leave loop if not busy.
              call         TestAbort           ;Check for Ctrl-C.
              jmp          W4NBLp

; Okay, put the data on the data lines:

ItsNotBusy:     dec        dx                  ;Point at data register.
                mov        al,   ah            ;Get a copy of the data.
                and        al,   0Fh           ;Strip out H.O. nibble
                out        dx,   al            ;”Prime” data lines, data not avail.
                or         al,   10h           ;Turn data available on.
                out        dx,   al            ;Send data w/data available strobe.

; Wait for the acknowledge from the receiving site. Every now and then
; check for a ctrl-C so the user can abort the transmission program from
; within this loop.

                inc        dx               ;Point at status register.
W4ALp:          mov        cx, 10000        ;Times to loop between ctrl-C checks.
Wait4Ack:       in         al, dx           ;Read status port.
                test       al, 80h          ;Ack = 1 when rcvr acknowledges.
                loope      Wait4Ack         ;Repeat 10000 times or until ack.
                jne        GotAck           ;Branch if we got an ack.
                call       TestAbort        ;Every 10000 calls, check for a


                                                                             Page 1211
Chapter 21

                           jmp        W4ALp            ; ctrl-C from the user.

             ; Send the data not available signal to the receiver:

             GotAck:       dec        dx               ;Point at data register.
                           mov        al, 0            ;Write a zero to bit 4, this appears
                           out        dx, al           ; as a one in the rcvr’s busy bit.


             ; Okay, on to the H.O. nibble:

                           inc        dx               ;Point at status register.
             W4NB2:        mov        cx, 10000        ;10000 calls between ctrl-C checks.
             Wait4NotBsy2: in         al, dx           ;Read status register.
                           test       al, 80h          ;Bit 7 = 1 if busy.
                           loopne     Wait4NotBsy2     ;Loop 10000 times while busy.
                           je         NotBusy2         ;H.O. bit clear (not busy)?
                           call       TestAbort        ;Check for ctrl-C.
                           jmp        W4NB2

             ; Okay, put the data on the data lines:

             NotBusy2:     dec        dx               ;Point at data register.
                           mov        al,   ah         ;Retrieve data to get H.O. nibble.
                           shr        al,   4          ;Move H.O. nibble to L.O. nibble.
                           out        dx,   al         ;”Prime” data lines.
                           or         al,   10h        ;Data + data available strobe.
                           out        dx,   al         ;Send data w/data available strobe.

             ; Wait for the acknowledge from the receiving site:

                           inc        dx               ;Point at status register.
             W4A2Lp:       mov        cx, 10000
             Wait4Ack2:    in         al, dx           ;Read status port.
                           test       al, 80h          ;Ack = 1
                           loope      Wait4Ack2        ;While while no acknowledge
                           jne        GotAck2          ;H.O. bit = 1 (ack)?
                           call       TestAbort        ;Check for ctrl-C
                           jmp        W4A2Lp

             ; Send the data not available signal to the receiver:

             GotAck2:      dec        dx               ;Point at data register.
                           mov        al, 0            ;Output a zero to bit #4 (that
                           out        dx, al           ; becomes busy=1 at rcvr).

                           mov        al, ah           ;Restore original data in AL.
                           pop        dx
                           pop        cx
                           ret
             SendByte      endp



             ; Synchronization routines:
             ;
             ; Send0s-     Transmits a zero to the receiver site and then waits to
             ;             see if it gets a set of ones back. Returns carry set if
             ;             this works, returns carry clear if we do not get a set of
             ;             ones back in a reasonable amount of time.

             Send0s        proc       near
                           push       cx
                           push       dx

                           mov        dx, MyPortAdrs

                           mov        al, 0               ;Write the initial zero
                           out        dx, al              ; value to our output port.

                           xor        cx, cx              ;Checks for ones 10000 times.
             Wait41s:      inc        dx                  ;Point at status port.
                           in         al, dx              ;Read status port.
                           dec        dx                  ;Point back at data port.


Page 1212
                                                                The PC Parallel Ports

              and        al, 78h            ;Mask input bits.
              cmp        al, 78h            ;All ones yet?
              loopne     Wait41s
              je         Got1s              ;Branch if success.
              clc                           ;Return failure.
              pop        dx
              pop        cx
              ret

Got1s:        stc                           ;Return success.
              pop        dx
              pop        cx
              ret
Send0s        endp


; Send1s-     Transmits all ones to the receiver site and then waits to
;             see if it gets a set of zeros back. Returns carry set if
;             this works, returns carry clear if we do not get a set of
;             zeros back in a reasonable amount of time.

Send1s        proc       near
              push       cx
              push       dx

              mov        dx, MyPortAdrs     ;LPT1: base address.

              mov        al, 0Fh            ;Write the “all ones”
              out        dx, al             ; value to our output port.

              mov        cx, 0
Wait40s:      inc        dx                 ;Point at input port.
              in         al, dx             ;Read the status port.
              dec        dx                 ;Point back at data port.
              and        al, 78h            ;Mask input bits.
              loopne     Wait40s            ;Loop until we get zero back.
              je         Got0s              ;All zeros? If so, branch.
              clc                           ;Return failure.
              pop        dx
              pop        cx
              ret


Got0s:        stc                           ;Return success.
              pop        dx
              pop        cx
              ret
Send1s        endp




; Synchronize- This procedure slowly writes all zeros and all ones to its
;              output port and checks the input status port to see if the
;              receiver site has synchronized. When the receiver site
;              is synchronized, it will write the value 05h to its output
;              port. So when this site sees the value 05h on its input
;              port, both sites are synchronized. Returns with the
;              carry flag set if this operation is successful, clear if
;              unsuccessful.

Synchronize   proc       near
              print
              byte       “Synchronizing with receiver program”
              byte       cr,lf,0

              mov        dx, MyPortAdrs

              mov        cx, TimeOutConst   ;Time out delay.
SyncLoop:     call       Send0s             ;Send zero bits, wait for
              jc         Got1s              ; ones (carry set=got ones).

; If we didn’t get what we wanted, write some ones at this point and see
; if we’re out of phase with the receiving site.


                                                                          Page 1213
Chapter 21


             Retry0:       call       Send1s              ;Send ones, wait for zeros.
                           jc         SyncLoop            ;Carry set = got zeros.

             ; Well, we didn’t get any response yet, see if the user has pressed ctrl-C
             ; to abort this program.

             DoRetry:      call       TestAbort

             ; Okay, the receiving site has yet to respond. Go back and try this again.

                           loop       SyncLoop

             ; If we’ve timed out, print an error message and return with the carry
             ; flag clear (to denote a timeout error).

                           print
                           byte       “Transmit: Timeout error waiting for receiver”
                           byte       cr,lf,0
                           clc
                           ret

             ; Okay, we wrote some zeros and we got some ones. Let’s write some ones
             ; and see if we get some zeros. If not, retry the loop.

             Got1s:
                           call       Send1s              ;Send one bits, wait for
                           jnc        DoRetry             ; zeros (carry set=got zeros).

             ; Well, we seem to be synchronized. Just to be sure, let’s play this out
             ; one more time.

                           call       Send0s              ;Send zeros, wait for ones.
                           jnc        Retry0
                           call       Send1s              ;Send ones, wait for zeros.
                           jnc        DoRetry

             ; We’re syncronized. Let’s send out the 05h value to the receiving
             ; site to let it know everything is cool:

                           mov        al, 05h             ;Send signal to receiver to
                           out        dx, al              ; tell it we’re sync’d.

                           xor        cx, cx            ;Long delay to give the rcvr
             FinalDelay:   loop       FinalDelay    ; time to prepare.

                           print
                           byte       “Synchronized with receiving site”
                           byte       cr,lf,0
                           stc
                           ret
             Synchronize   endp



             ; File I/O routines:
             ;
             ; GetFileInfo- Opens the user specified file and passes along the file
             ;              name and file size to the receiving site. Returns the
             ;              carry flag set if this operation is successful, clear if
             ;              unsuccessful.

             GetFileInfo   proc       near

             ; Get the filename from the DOS command line:

                           mov        ax, 1
                           argv
                           mov        word ptr FileNamePtr, di
                           mov        word ptr FileNamePtr+2, es

                           printf
                           byte       “Opening %^s\n”,0
                           dword      FileNamePtr


Page 1214
                                                                 The PC Parallel Ports


; Open the file:

              push       ds
              mov        ax, 3D00h          ;Open for reading.
              lds        dx, FileNamePtr
              int        21h
              pop        ds
              jc         BadFile
              mov        FileHandle, ax

; Compute the size of the file (do this by seeking to the last position
; in the file and using the return position as the file length):

              mov        bx, ax             ;Need handle in BX.
              mov        ax, 4202h          ;Seek to end of file.
              xor        cx, cx             ;Seek to position zero
              xor        dx, dx             ; from the end of file.
              int        21h
              jc         BadFile

; Save final position as file length:

              mov        word ptr FileSize, ax
              mov        word ptr FileSize+2, dx

; Need to rewind file back to the beginning (seek to position zero):

              mov        bx, FileHandle     ;Need handle in BX.
              mov        ax, 4200h          ;Seek to beginning of file.
              xor        cx, cx             ;Seek to position zero
              xor        dx, dx
              int        21h
              jc         BadFile


; Okay, transmit the good stuff over to the receiving site:

              mov        al, byte   ptr FileSize          ;Send the file
              call       SendByte                         ; size over.
              mov        al, byte   ptr FileSize+1
              call       SendByte
              mov        al, byte   ptr FileSize+2
              call       SendByte
              mov        al, byte   ptr FileSize+3
              call       SendByte

              les        bx, FileNamePtr                  ;Send the characters
SendName:     mov        al, es:[bx]                      ; in the filename to
              call       SendByte                         ; the receiver until
              inc        bx                               ; we hit a zero byte.
              cmp        al, 0
              jne        SendName
              stc                                         ;Return success.
              ret

BadFile:      print
              byte       “Error transmitting file information:”,0
              puti
              putcr
              clc
              ret
GetFileInfo   endp


; GetFileData-This procedure reads the data from the file and transmits
;             it to the receiver a byte at a time.

GetFileData   proc       near
              mov        ah, 3Fh            ;DOS read opcode.
              mov        cx, 512            ;Read 512 bytes at a time.
              mov        bx, FileHandle     ;File to read from.
              lea        dx, FileBuffer     ;Buffer to hold data.
              int        21h                ;Read the data


                                                                           Page 1215
Chapter 21

                           jc         GFDError            ;Quit if error reading data.

                           mov        cx, ax              ;Save # of bytes actually read.
                           jcxz       GFDDone             ; quit if at EOF.
                           lea        bx, FileBuffer      ;Send the bytes in the file
             XmitLoop:     mov        al, [bx]            ; buffer over to the rcvr
                           call       SendByte            ; one at a time.
                           inc        bx
                           loop       XmitLoop
                           jmp        GetFileData         ;Read rest of file.

             GFDError:     print
                           byte       “DOS error #”,0
                           puti
                           print
                           byte       “ while reading file”,cr,lf,0
             GFDDone:      ret
             GetFileData   endp



             ; Okay, here’s the main program that controls everything.

             Main          proc
                           mov        ax, dseg
                           mov        ds, ax
                           meminit


             ; First, get the address of LPT1: from the BIOS variables area.

                           mov        ax, 40h
                           mov        es, ax
                           mov        ax, es:[PrtrBase]
                           mov        MyPortAdrs, ax

             ; See if we have a filename parameter:

                           argc
                           cmp        cx, 1
                           je         GotName
                           print
                           byte       “Usage: transmit <filename>”,cr,lf,0
                           jmp        Quit



             GotName:      call       Synchronize         ;Wait for the transmitter program.
                           jnc        Quit

                           call       GetFileInfo      ;Get file name and size.
                           jnc        Quit

                           call       GetFileData      ;Get the file’s data.

             Quit:         ExitPgm                     ;DOS macro to quit program.
             Main          endp

             cseg          ends

             sseg          segment    para stack ‘stack’
             stk           byte       1024 dup (“stack “)
             sseg          ends

             zzzzzzseg     segment    para public ‘zzzzzz’
             LastBytes     byte       16 dup (?)
             zzzzzzseg     ends
                           end        Main




Page 1216
                                                                                 The PC Parallel Ports

Here is the receiver program that accepts and stores away the data sent by the program above:

;   RECEIVE.ASM
;
;   This program is the receiver portion of the programs that transmit files
;   across a Laplink compatible parallel cable.
;
;   This program assumes that the user want to use LPT1: for transmission.
;   Adjust the equates, or read the port from the command line if this
;   is inappropriate.

                  .286
                  .xlist
                  include    stdlib.a
                  includelib stdlib.lib
                  .list


dseg              segment        para public ‘data’

TimeOutConst      equ            100                    ;About 1 min on 66Mhz 486.
PrtrBase          equ            8                      ;Offset to LPT1: adrs.

MyPortAdrs         word          ?                      ;Holds printer port address.
FileHandle         word          ?                      ;Handle for output file.
FileBuffer         byte          512 dup (?)            ;Buffer for incoming data.

FileSize          dword          ?                      ;Size of incoming file.
FileName          byte           128 dup (0)            ;Holds filename

dseg              ends

cseg              segment        para public ‘code’
                  assume         cs:cseg, ds:dseg


; TestAbort-      Reads the keyboard and gives the user the opportunity to
;                 hit the ctrl-C key.

TestAbort         proc           near
                  push           ax
                  mov            ah, 1
                  int            16h                    ;See if keypress.
                  je             NoKeypress
                  mov            ah, 8                  ;Read char, chk for ctrl-C
                  int            21h
NoKeyPress:       pop            ax
                  ret
TestAbort         endp



; GetByte-        Reads a single byte from the parallel port (four bits at
;                 at time). Returns the byte in AL.

GetByte           proc           near
                  push           cx
                  push           dx

; Receive the L.O. Nibble.

                  mov            dx, MyPortAdrs
                  mov            al, 10h                ;Signal not busy.
                  out            dx, al

                  inc            dx                     ;Point at status port

W4DLp:            mov            cx, 10000
Wait4Data:        in             al, dx                 ;See if data available.
                  test           al, 80h                ; (bit 7=0 if data available).
                  loopne         Wait4Data
                  je             DataIsAvail            ;Is data available?
                  call           TestAbort              ;If not, check for ctrl-C.


                                                                                                Page 1217
Chapter 21

                            jmp       W4DLp

             DataIsAvail:   shr       al, 3                ;Save this four bit package
                            and       al, 0Fh              ; (This is the L.O. nibble
                            mov       ah, al               ; for our byte).

                            dec       dx                   ;Point at data register.
                            mov       al, 0                ;Signal data taken.
                            out       dx, al

                            inc       dx                   ;Point at status register.
             W4ALp:         mov       cx, 10000
             Wait4Ack:      in        al, dx               ;Wait for transmitter to
                            test      al, 80h              ; retract data available.
                            loope     Wait4Ack             ;Loop until data not avail.
                            jne       NextNibble           ;Branch if data not avail.
                            call      TestAbort            ;Let user hit ctrl-C.
                            jmp       W4ALp

             ; Receive the H.O. nibble:

             NextNibble:    dec       dx                   ;Point at data register.
                            mov       al, 10h              ;Signal not busy
                            out       dx, al
                            inc       dx                   ;Point at status port
             W4D2Lp:        mov       cx, 10000
             Wait4Data2:    in        al, dx               ;See if data available.
                            test      al, 80h              ; (bit 7=0 if data available).
                            loopne    Wait4Data2           ;Loop until data available.
                            je        DataAvail2           ;Branch if data available.
                            call      TestAbort            ;Check for ctrl-C.
                            jmp       W4D2Lp

             DataAvail2:    shl       al,   1              ;Merge this H.O. nibble
                            and       al,   0F0h           ; with the existing L.O.
                            or        ah,   al             ; nibble.
                            dec       dx                   ;Point at data register.
                            mov       al,   0              ;Signal data taken.
                            out       dx,   al

                            inc       dx                   ;Point at status register.
             W4A2Lp:        mov       cx, 10000
             Wait4Ack2:     in        al, dx               ;Wait for transmitter to
                            test      al, 80h              ; retract data available.
                            loope     Wait4Ack2            ;Wait for data not available.
                            jne       ReturnData           ;Branch if ack.
                            call      TestAbort            ;Check for ctrl-C
                            jmp       W4A2Lp

             ReturnData:    mov       al, ah               ;Put data in al.
                            pop       dx
                            pop       cx
                            ret
             GetByte        endp




             ; Synchronize- This procedure waits until it sees all zeros on the input
             ;              bits we receive from the transmitting site. Once it receives
             ;              all zeros, it writes all ones to the output port. When
             ;              all ones come back, it writes all zeros. It repeats this
             ;              process until the transmitting site writes the value 05h.

             Synchronize    proc      near

                            print
                            byte      “Synchronizing with transmitter program”
                            byte      cr,lf,0

                            mov       dx,   MyPortAdrs
                            mov       al,   0              ;Initialize our output port
                            out       dx,   al             ; to prevent confusion.
                            mov       bx,   TimeOutConst   ;Time out condition.


Page 1218
                                                                The PC Parallel Ports

SyncLoop:       mov      cx, 0               ;For time out purposes.
SyncLoop0:      inc      dx                  ;Point at input port.
                in       al, dx              ;Read our input bits.
                dec      dx
                and      al, 78h             ;Keep only the data bits.
                cmp      al, 78h             ;Check for all ones.
                je       Got1s               ;Branch if all ones.
                cmp      al, 0               ;See if all zeros.
                loopne   SyncLoop0

; Since we just saw a zero, write all ones to the output port.

                mov      al, 0FFh         ;Write all ones
                out      dx, al

; Now wait for all ones to arrive from the transmitting site.

SyncLoop1:      inc      dx                  ;Point at status register.
                in       al, dx              ;Read status port.
                dec      dx                  ;Point back at data register.
                and      al, 78h             ;Keep only the data bits.
                cmp      al, 78h             ;Are they all ones?
                loopne   SyncLoop1           ;Repeat while not ones.
                je       Got1s               ;Branch if got ones.

; If we’ve timed out, check to see if the user has pressed ctrl-C to
; abort.

                call     TestAbort           ;Check for ctrl-C.
                dec      bx                  ;See if we’ve timed out.
                jne      SyncLoop            ;Repeat if time-out.

                print
                byte     “Receive: connection timed out during synchronization”
                byte     cr,lf,0
                clc                        ;Signal time-out.
                ret

; Jump down here once we’ve seen both a zero and a one. Send the two
; in combinations until we get a 05h from the transmitting site or the
; user presses Ctrl-C.

Got1s:          inc      dx                  ;Point at status register.
                in       al, dx              ;Just copy whatever appears
                dec      dx                  ; in our input port to the
                shr      al, 3               ; output port until the
                and      al, 0Fh             ; transmitting site sends
                cmp      al, 05h             ; us the value 05h
                je       Synchronized
                not      al                  ;Keep inverting what we get
                out      dx, al              ; and send it to xmitter.
                call     TestAbort           ;Check for CTRL-C here.
                jmp      Got1s


; Okay, we’re synchronized. Return to the caller.

Synchronized:
                and      al, 0Fh             ;Make sure busy bit is one
                out      dx, al              ; (bit 4=0 for busy=1).
                print
                byte     “Synchronized with transmitting site”
                byte     cr,lf,0
                stc
                ret
Synchronize     endp


; GetFileInfo- The transmitting program sends us the file length and a
;              zero terminated filename. Get that data here.

GetFileInfo     proc     near
                mov      dx, MyPortAdrs
                mov      al, 10h             ;Set busy bit to zero.


                                                                           Page 1219
Chapter 21

                            out       dx, al             ;Tell xmit pgm, we’re ready.

             ; First four bytes contain the filesize:

                            call      GetByte
                            mov       byte ptr   FileSize, al
                            call      GetByte
                            mov       byte ptr   FileSize+1, al
                            call      GetByte
                            mov       byte ptr   FileSize+2, al
                            call      GetByte
                            mov       byte ptr   FileSize+3, al

             ; The next n bytes (up to a zero terminating byte) contain the filename:

                            mov       bx, 0
             GetFileName:   call      GetByte
                            mov       FileName[bx], al
                            call      TestAbort
                            inc       bx
                            cmp       al, 0
                            jne       GetFileName

                            ret
             GetFileInfo    endp


             ; GetFileData- Receives the file data from the transmitting site
             ;              and writes it to the output file.

             GetFileData    proc      near

             ; First, see if we have more than 512 bytes left to go

                            cmp       word ptr FileSize+2, 0           ;If H.O. word is not
                            jne       MoreThan512                      ; zero, more than 512.
                            cmp       word ptr FileSize, 512           ;If H.O. is zero, just
                            jbe       LastBlock                        ; check L.O. word.

             ; We’ve got more than 512 bytes left to go in this file, read 512 bytes
             ; at this point.

             MoreThan512:   mov       cx, 512                          ;Receive 512 bytes
                            lea       bx, FileBuffer                   ; from the xmitter.
             ReadLoop:      call      GetByte                          ;Read a byte.
                            mov       [bx], al                         ;Save the byte away.
                            inc       bx                               ;Move on to next
                            loop      ReadLoop                         ; buffer element.

             ; Okay, write the data to the file:

                            mov       ah, 40h                          ;DOS write opcode.
                            mov       bx, FileHandle                   ;Write to this file.
                            mov       cx, 512                          ;Write 512 bytes.
                            lea       dx, Filebuffer                   ;From this address.
                            int       21h
                            jc        BadWrite                         ;Quit if error.

             ; Decrement the file size by 512 bytes:

                            sub       word ptr FileSize, 512           ;32-bit subtraction
                            sbb       word ptr FileSize, 0             ; of 512.
                            jmp       GetFileData

             ; Process the last block, that contains 1..511 bytes, here.

             LastBlock:
                            mov       cx, word ptr FileSize            ;Receive the last
                            lea       bx, FileBuffer                   ; 1..511 bytes from
             ReadLB:        call      GetByte                          ; the transmitter.
                            mov       [bx], al
                            inc       bx
                            loop      ReadLB



Page 1220
                                                              The PC Parallel Ports

              mov        ah, 40h                          ;Write the last block
              mov        bx, FileHandle                   ; of bytes to the
              mov        cx, word ptr FileSize            ; file.
              lea        dx, Filebuffer
              int        21h
              jnc        Closefile

BadWrite:     print
              byte       “DOS error #”,0
              puti
              print
              byte       “ while writing data.”,cr,lf,0

; Close the file here.

CloseFile:    mov        bx, FileHandle                   ;Close this file.
              mov        ah, 3Eh                          ;DOS close opcode.
              int        21h
              ret
GetFileData   endp



; Here’s the main program that gets the whole ball rolling.

Main          proc
              mov        ax, dseg
              mov        ds, ax
              meminit


; First, get the address of LPT1: from the BIOS variables area.

              mov        ax, 40h           ;Point at BIOS variable segment.
              mov        es, ax
              mov        ax, es:[PrtrBase]
              mov        MyPortAdrs, ax

              call       Synchronize       ;Wait for the transmitter program.
              jnc        Quit

              call       GetFileInfo       ;Get file name and size.

              printf
              byte       “Filename: %s\nFile size: %ld\n”,0
              dword      Filename, FileSize

              mov        ah, 3Ch           ;Create file.
              mov        cx, 0             ;Standard attributes
              lea        dx, Filename
              int        21h
              jnc        GoodOpen
              print
              byte       “Error opening file”,cr,lf,0
              jmp        Quit

GoodOpen:     mov        FileHandle, ax
              call       GetFileData       ;Get the file’s data.

Quit:         ExitPgm                      ;DOS macro to quit program.
Main          endp

cseg          ends

sseg          segment    para stack ‘stack’
stk           byte       1024 dup (“stack “)
sseg          ends

zzzzzzseg     segment    para public ‘zzzzzz’
LastBytes     byte       16 dup (?)
zzzzzzseg     ends
              end        Main




                                                                         Page 1221
Chapter 21


21.5    Summary
                  The PC’s parallel port, though originally designed for controlling parallel printers, is a general pur-
             pose eight bit output port with several handshaking lines you can use to control many other devices in
             addition to printers.
                   In theory, parallel communications should be many times faster than serial communications. In prac-
             tice, however, real world constraints and economics prevent this from being the case. Nevertheless, you
             can still connect high performance devices to the PC’s parallel port.
                  The PC’s parallel ports come in two varieties: unidirectional and bidirectional. The bidirectional ver-
             sions are available only on PS/2s, certain laptops, and a few other machines. Whereas the eight data lines
             are output only on the unidirectional ports, you can program them as inputs or outputs on the bidirec-
             tional port. While this bidirectional operation is of little value to a printer, it can improve the performance
             of other devices that connect to the parallel port, such as disk and tape drives, network adapters, SCSI
             adapters, and so on.
                   When the system communicates with some other device over the parallel port, it needs some way to
             tell that device that data is available on the data lines. Likewise, the devices needs some way to tell the sys-
             tem that it is not busy and it has accepted the data. This requires some additional signals on the parallel
             port known as handshaking lines. A typical PC parallel port provides three handshaking signals: the data
             available strobe, the data taken acknowledge signal, and the device busy line. These lines easily control
             the flow of data between the PC and some external device.
                   In addition to the handshaking lines, the PC’s parallel port provides several other auxiliary I/O lines
             as well. In total, there are 12 output lines and five input lines on the PC’s parallel port. There are three I/O
             ports in the PC’s address space associated with each I/O port. The first of these (at the port’s base address)
             is the data register. This is an eight bit output register on unidirectional ports, it is an input/output register
             on bidirectional ports. The second register, at the base address plus one, is the status register. The status
             register is an input port. Five of those bits correspond to the five input lines on the PC’s parallel port. The
             third register (at base address plus two) is the control register. Four of these bits correspond to the addi-
             tional four output bits on the PC, one of the bits controls the IRQ line on the parallel port, and a sixth bit
             controls the data direction on the birdirectional ports.
                  For more information on the parallel port’s hardware configuration, see:
                       •    “Basic Parallel Port Information” on page 1199
                       •    “The Parallel Port Hardware” on page 1201
                    Although many vendors use the parallel port to control lots of different devices, a parallel printer is
             still the device most often connected to the parallel port. There are three ways application programs com-
             monly send data to the printer: by calling DOS to print a character, by calling BIOS’ int 17h ISR to print a
             character, or by talking directly to the parallel port. You should avoid this last technique because of possi-
             ble software incompatibilities with other devices that connect to the parallel port. For more information on
             printing data, including how to write your own int 17h ISR/printer driver, see:
                       •    “Controlling a Printer Through the Parallel Port” on page 1202
                       •    “Printing via DOS” on page 1203
                       •    “Printing via BIOS” on page 1203
                       •    “An INT 17h Interrupt Service Routine” on page 1203
                  One popular use of the parallel port is to transfer data between two computers; for example, transfer-
             ring data between a desktop and a laptop machine. To demonstrate how to use the parallel port to control
             other devices besides printers, this chapter presents a program to transfer data between computers on the
             unidirectional parallel ports (it also works on bidirectional ports). For all the details, see
                       •    “Inter-Computer Communications on the Parallel Port” on page 1209



Page 1222
