The PC Video Display                                                                                    Chapter 23
                           The PC’s video display is a very complex system. First, there is not a single common device as exists
                     for the parallel and serial ports, or even a few devices (like the keyboard systems found on PCs). No, there
                     are literally dozens of different display adapter cards available for the PC. Furthermore, each adapter typi-
                     cally supports several different display modes. Given the large number of display modes and uses for the
                     display adapters, it would be very easy to write a book as large as this one on the PC’s display adapters
                     alone1 However, this is not that text. This book would hardly be complete without at least mentioning the
                     PC’s video display, but there are not enough pages remaining in this book to do justice to the subject.
                     Therefore, this chapter will discuss the 80 x 25 text display mode that nearly all display adapters support.


23.1     Memory Mapped Video
                           Most peripheral devices on the PC use I/O mapped input/output. A program communicates with I/O
                     mapped devices using the 80x86 in, out, ins , and outs instructions, accessing devices in the PC’s I/O
                     address space. While the video controller chips that appear on PC video display adapters also map regis-
                     ters to the PC’s I/O space, these cards also employ a second form of I/O addressing: memory mapped I/O
                     input/output. In particular, the 80 x 25 text display is nothing more than a two dimensional array of words
                     with each word in the array corresponding a character on the screen. This array appears just above the
                     640K point in the PC’s memory address space. If you store data into this array using standard memory
                     addressing instruction (e.g., mov), you will affect the characters appearing on the display.
                          There are actually two different arrays you need to worry about. Monochrome system (remember
                     those?) locate their text display starting at location B000:0000 in memory. Color systems locate their text
                     displays at location B800:0000 in memory. These locations are the base addresses of a column major order
                     array declared as follows:
                                 Display: array [0..79, 0..24] of word;

                     If you prefer to work with row major ordered arrays, no problem, the video display is equal to the follow-
                     ing array definition:
                                 Display: array [0..24, 0..79] of word;

                     Note that location (0,0) is the upper left hand corner and location (79,24) is the lower right hand corner of
                     the display (the values in parentheses are the x and y coordinates, with the x/horizontal coordinate
                     appearing first).
                        The L.O. byte of each word contains the PC/ASCII code for the character you want to display (see
                     Appendix A for a listing of the PC/ASCII character set). The H.O. byte of each word is the attribute byte.
                     We will return to the attribute byte in the next section.
                          The display page consumes slightly less than 4 Kilobytes in the memory map. The color display
                     adapters actually provide 32K for text displays and let you select one of eight different displays. Each such
                     display begins on a 4K boundary, at address B800:0, B800:1000, B800:2000, B800:3000, ..., B800:7000.
                     Note that most modern color display adapters actually provide memory from address A000:0 through
                     B000:FFFF (and more), but the text display only uses the 32K from B800:0..B800:7FFF. In this chapter, we
                     will only concern ourselves with the first color display page at address B800:0. However, everything dis-
                     cussed in this chapter applies to the other display pages as well.
                          The monochrome adapter provides only a single display page. Indeed, the earliest monochrome dis-
                     play adapters included only 4K on-board memory (contrast this with modern high density color display
                     adapters that have up to four megabytes of on-board memory!).


   1. In fact, several such books exist. See the bibliography.

                                                                                                                      Page 1247

                                   Thi d              t          t d ith F   M k   402
Chapter 23

                      You can address the memory on the video display like ordinary RAM. You could even store program
                 variables, or even code, in this memory. However, it is never a good idea to do this. First of all, any time
                 you write to the display screen, you will wipe out any variables stored in the active display memory. Even
                 if you store such code or variables in an inactive display page (e.g., pages one through seven on a color
                 display adapter), using this memory in this manner is not a good idea because access to the display
                 adapter is very slow. Main memory runs two to ten times faster (depending on the machine).


23.2    The Video Attribute Byte
                      The video attribute associated with each character on the screen controls underlining, intensity,
                 inverse video, and blinking video on monochrome adapters. It controls blinking and character fore-
                 ground/background colors on color displays. The following diagrams provide the possible attribute val-
                 ues:


                     7       6       5       4       3       2       1   0



                                                                                   Display Mode
                                                                                            000 000 = Invisible
                                                                                            000 001 = Underlined
                                                                                            000 111 = Normal
                                                                                            111 000 = Inverse video

                                                                                   Intensity: high = 1, low = 0

                                                                                   Blinking = 1, static = 0

                         Monochrome Display Adapter Attribute Byte Format


             7   6       5       4       3       2       1       0



                                                                         Foreground color:
                                                                                  0000 = Black                1000 = Dark Gray
                                                                                  0001 = Blue                 1001 = Light Blue
                                                                                  0010 = Green                1010 = Light Green
                                                                                  0011 = Cyan                 1011 = Light Cyan
                                                                                  0100 = Red                  1100 = Light Red
                                                                                  0101 = Magenta              1101 = Light Magenta
                                                                                  0110 = Brown                1110 = Yellow
                                                                                  0111 = Light Gray           1111 = White

                                                                         Background color (see values 0000..0111 above)

                                                                         Blinking = 1, static = 0

                         Color Display Adapter Attribute Byte Format

Page 1248
                                                                                                                        The PC Video Display

                         To get reverse video on the color display, simply swap the foreground and background colors. Note
                    that a foreground color of zero with a background color of seven produces black characters on a white
                    background, the standard reverse video colors and the same attribute values you’d use on the mono-
                    chrome display adapter.
                         You need to be careful when choosing foreground and background colors for text on a color display
                    adapters. Some combinations are impossible to read (e.g., white characters on a white background). Other
                    colors go together so poorly the text will be extremely difficult to read, if not impossible (how about light
                    green letters on a green background?). You must choose your colors with care!
                         Blinking characters are great for drawing attention to some important text on the screen (like a warn-
                    ing). However, it is easy to overdo blinking text on the screen. You should never have more than one
                    word or phrase blinking on the screen at one time. Furthermore, you should never leave blinking charac-
                    ters on the screen for any length of time. After a few seconds, replace blinking characters with normal
                    characters to avoid annoying the user of your software.
                         Keep in mind, you can easily change the attributes of various characters on the screen without affect-
                    ing the actual text. Remember, the attribute bytes appear at odd addresses in the memory space for the
                    video display. You can easily go in and change these bytes while leaving the character code data alone.


23.3    Programming the Text Display
                         You might ask why anyone would want to bother working directly with the memory mapped display
                    on the PC. After all, DOS, BIOS, and the UCR Standard Library provide much more convenient ways to
                    display text on the screen. Handling new lines (carriage return and line feed) at the end of each line or,
                    worse yet, scrolling the screen when the display is full, is a lot of work. Work that is taken care of for you
                    automatically by the aforementioned routines. Work you have to do yourself if you access screen memory
                    directly. So why bother?
                         There are two reasons: performance and flexibility. The BIOS video display routines2 are dreadfully
                    slow. You can easily get a 10 to 100 times performance boost by writing directly to screen memory. For a
                    typical computer science class project, this may not be important, especially if you’re running on a fast
                    machine like a 150 MHz Pentium. On the other hand, if you are developing a program that displays and
                    removes several windows or pop-up menus on the screen, the BIOS routines won’t cut it.
                         Although the BIOS int 10h functions provide a large set of video I/O routines, there will be lots of
                    functions you might want to have that the BIOS just doesn’t provide. In such cases, going directly to screen
                    memory is one way to solve the problem.
                         Another difficulty with BIOS routine is that they are not reentrant. You cannot call a BIOS display
                    function from an interrupt service routine, nor can you freely call BIOS from concurrently executing pro-
                    cesses. However, by writing your own video service routines, you can easily create a window for each
                    concurrent thread you application is executing. Then each thread can call your routines to display its out-
                    put independent of the other threads executing on the system.
                         The AMAZE.ASM program (see “Processes, Coroutines, and Concurrency” on page 1065) is a good
                    example of a program that directly access the text display by directly storing data into the video display’s
                    memory mapped display array. This program access display memory directly because it is more conve-
                    nient to do so (the screen’s display array maps quite nicely to the internal maze array). Simple video games
                    like a space invaders game or a “remove the bricks” game also map nicely to a memory mapped video dis-
                    play.
                         The following program provides an excellent example of an application that needs to access video
                    memory directly. This program is a screen capture TSR. When you press the left shift key and then the
                    right shift key, this program copies the current screen contents to an internal buffer. When you press the


   2. The Standard Library calls DOS and DOS calls BIOS for all display I/O, hence they all become BIOS calls at one level or another.

                                                                                                                                         Page 1249
Chapter 23

             right shift key followed by the left shift key, this program copies its internal buffer to the display screen.
             Originally, this program was written to capture CodeView screens for the lab manual accompanying this
             text. There are commercial screen capture programs (e.g., HiJak) that would normally do the job, but are
             incompatible with CodeView. This short TSR allows one to capture screens in CodeView, quit CodeView,
             put the CodeView screen back onto the display, and the use a program like HiJak to capture the output.
             ;   GRABSCRN.ASM
             ;
             ;   A short TSR to capture the current display screen and display it later.
             ;
             ;   Note that this code does not patch into int 2Fh (multiplex interrupt)
             ;   nor can you remove this code from memory except by rebooting.
             ;   If you want to be able to do these two things (as well as check for
             ;   a previous installation), see the chapter on resident programs. Such
             ;   code was omitted from this program because of length constraints.
             ;
             ;
             ;   cseg and EndResident must occur before the standard library segments!

             cseg                segment        para public ‘code’
             OldInt9             dword          ?
             ScreenSave          byte           4096 dup (?)
             cseg                ends

             ; Marker segment, to find the end of the resident section.

             EndResident         segment        para public ‘Resident’
             EndResident         ends

                                .xlist
                                include    stdlib.a
                                includelib stdlib.lib
                                .list


             RShiftScan          equ            36h
             LShiftScan          equ            2ah

             ; Bits for the shift/modifier keys

             RShfBit             equ            1
             LShfBit             equ            2

             KbdFlags            equ            <byte ptr ds:[17h]>

             byp                 equ            <byte ptr>


             ; Screen segment address. This value is for color displays only.
             ; Change to B000h if you want to use this program on a mono display.

             ScreenSeg           equ            0B800h

             cseg               segment         para public ‘code’
                                assume          ds:nothing



             ; MyInt9-          INT 9 ISR. This routine reads the keyboard port to see
             ;                  if a shift key scan code just came along. If the right
             ;                  shift bit is set in KbdFlags the a left shift key scan
             ;                  code comes along, we want to copy the data from our
             ;                  internal buffer to the screen’s memory. If the left shift
             ;                  bit is set and a right shift key scan code comes along,
             ;                  we want to copy the screen memory into our local array.
             ;                  In any case (including none of the above), we always transfer
             ;                  control to the original INT 9 handler.

             MyInt9             proc            far
                                push            ds
                                push            ax



Page 1250
                                                               The PC Video Display

                 mov      ax, 40h
                 mov      ds, ax

                 in       al, 60h             ;Read the keyboard port.
                 cmp      al, RShiftScan      ;Right shift just go down?
                 je       DoRight
                 cmp      al, LShiftScan      ;How about the left shift?
                 jne      QuitMyInt9

; If this is the left scan code, see if the right shift key is already
; down.

                 test     KbdFlags, RShfBit
                 je       QuitMyInt9        ;Branch if no

; Okay, right shift was down and we just saw left shift, copy our local
; data back to screen memory:

                 pushf
                 push     es
                 push     cx
                 push     di
                 push     si
                 mov      cx, 2048
                 mov      si, cs
                 mov      ds, si
                 lea      si, ScreenSave
                 mov      di, ScreenSeg
                 mov      es, di
                 xor      di, di
                 jmp      DoMove

; Okay, we just saw the right shift key scan code, see if the left shift
; key is already down. If so, save the current screen data to our local
; array.

DoRight:         test     KbdFlags, LShfBit
                 je       QuitMyInt9

                 pushf
                 push     es
                 push     cx
                 push     di
                 push     si
                 mov      cx,   2048
                 mov      ax,   cs
                 mov      es,   ax
                 lea      di,   ScreenSave
                 mov      si,   ScreenSeg
                 mov      ds,   si
                 xor      si,   si

DoMove:          cld
           rep   movsw
                 pop      si
                 pop      di
                 pop      cx
                 pop      es
                 popf
QuitMyInt9:
                 pop      ax
                 pop      ds
                 jmp      OldInt9
MyInt9           endp



Main             proc
                 assume   ds:cseg

                 mov      ax, cseg
                 mov      ds, ax

                 print


                                                                           Page 1251
Chapter 23

                                byte           “Screen capture TSR”,cr,lf
                                byte           “Pressing left shift, then right shift, captures “
                                byte           “the current screen.”,cr,lf
                                byte           “Pressing right shift, then left shift, displays “
                                byte           “the last captured screen.”,cr,lf
                                byte           0

             ;   Patch into the INT 9 interrupt vector. Note that the
             ;   statements above have made cseg the current data segment,
             ;   so we can store the old INT 9 value directly into
             ;   the OldInt9 variable.

                                cli                              ;Turn off interrupts!
                                mov            ax, 0
                                mov            es, ax
                                mov            ax, es:[9*4]
                                mov            word ptr OldInt9, ax
                                mov            ax, es:[9*4 + 2]
                                mov            word ptr OldInt9+2, ax
                                mov            es:[9*4], offset MyInt9
                                mov            es:[9*4+2], cs
                                sti                              ;Okay, ints back on.


             ; We’re hooked up, the only thing that remains is to terminate and
             ; stay resident.

                                print
                                byte           “Installed.”,cr,lf,0

                                mov            ah, 62h                  ;Get this program’s PSP
                                int            21h                      ; value.

                                mov            dx, EndResident   ;Compute size of program.
                                sub            dx, bx
                                mov            ax, 3100h     ;DOS TSR command.
                                int            21h
             Main               endp
             cseg               ends

             sseg               segment        para stack ‘stack’
             stk                db             1024 dup (“stack “)
             sseg               ends

             zzzzzzseg          segment        para public ‘zzzzzz’
             LastBytes          db             16 dup (?)
             zzzzzzseg          ends
                                end            Main




23.4    Summary
                  The PC’s video system uses a memory mapped array for the screen data. This is an 80 x 25 column
             major organized array of words. Each word in the array corresponds to a single character on the screen.
             This array begins at location B000:0 for monochrome displays and B800:0 for color displays. For additional
             information, see:
                      •    “Memory Mapped Video” on page 1247
                  The L.O. byte is the PC/ASCII character code for that particular screen position, the H.O. byte con-
             tains the attributes for that character. The attribute selects blinking, intensity, and background/foreground
             colors (on a color display). For more information on the attribute byte, see:
                      •    “The Video Attribute Byte” on page 1248
                  There are a few reasons why you would want to bother accessing display memory directly. Speed
             and flexibility are the two primary reasons people go directly to screen memory. You can create your own


Page 1252
                                                                                The PC Video Display

screen functions that the BIOS doesn’t support and do it one or two orders of magnitude faster than the
BIOS by writing directly to screen memory. To find out about this, and to see a simple example, check out
         •    “Programming the Text Display” on page 1249




                                                                                             Page 1253
Chapter 23




Page 1254
