The PC Game Adapter                                                                                     Chapter 24
                         One need look no farther than the internals of several popular games on the PC to discover than
                    many programmers do not fully understand one of the least complex devices attached to the PC today –
                    the analog game adapter. This device allows a user to connect up to four resistive potentiometers and four
                    digital switch connections to the PC. The design of the PC’s game adapter was obviously influenced by the
                    analog input capabilities of the Apple II computer1, the most popular computer available at the time the
                    PC was developed. Although IBM provided for twice the analog inputs of the Apple II, thinking that
                    would give them an edge, their decision to support only four switches and four potentiometers (or “pots”)
                    seems confining to game designers today – in much the same way that IBM’s decision to support 256K
                    RAM seems so limiting today. Nevertheless, game designers have managed to create some really marvel-
                    ous products, even living with the limitations of IBM’s 1981 design.
                         IBM’s analog input design, like Apple’s, was designed to be dirt cheap. Accuracy and performance
                    were not a concern at all. In fact, you can purchase the electronic parts to build your own version of the
                    game adapter, at retail, for under three dollars. Indeed, today you can purchase a game adapter card from
                    various discount merchants for under eight dollars. Unfortunately, IBM’s low-cost design in 1981 produces
                    some major performance problems for high-speed machines and high-performance game software in the
                    1990’s. However, there is no use crying over spilled milk – we’re stuck with the original game adapter
                    design, we need to make the most of it. The following sections will describe how to do exactly that.


24.1    Typical Game Devices
                         The game adapter is nothing more than a computer interface to various game input devices. The
                    game adapter card typically contains a DB15 connector into which you plug an external device. Typical
                    devices you can obtain for the game adapter include paddles, joysticks, flight yokes, digital joysticks, rud-
                    der pedals, RC simulators, and steering wheels. Undoubtedly, this is but a short list of the types of devices
                    you can connect to the game adapter. Most of these devices are far more expensive that the game adapter
                    card itself. Indeed, certain high performance flight simulator consoles for the game adapter cost several
                    hundred dollars.
                         The digital joystick is probably the least complex device you can connect to the PC’s game port. This
                    device consists of four switches and a stick. Pushing the stick forward, left, right, or pulling it backward
                    closes one of the switches. The game adapter card provides four switch inputs, so you can sense which
                    direction (including the rest position) the user is pressing the digital joystick. Most digital joysticks also
                    allow you to sense the in-between positions by closing two contacts at once. for example, pushing the
                    control stick at a 45 degree angle between forward and right closes both the forward and right switches.
                    The application software can sense this and take appropriate action. The original allure of these devices is
                    that they were very cheap to manufacture (these were the original joysticks found on most home game
                    machines). However, as manufacturers increased production of analog joysticks, the price fell to the point
                    that digital joysticks failed to offer a substantial price difference. So today, you will rarely encounter such
                    devices in the hands of a typical user.
                         The game paddle is another device whose use has declined over the years. A game paddle is a single
                    pot in a case with a single knob (and, typically, a single push button). Apple used to ship a pair of game
                    paddles with every Apple II they sold. As a result, games that used game paddles were still quite popular
                    when IBM released the PC in 1981. Indeed, a couple manufacturers produced game paddles for the PC
                    when it was first introduced. However, once again the cost of manufacturing analog joysticks fell to the
                    point that paddles couldn’t compete. Although paddles are the appropriate input device for many games,
                    joysticks could do just about everything a game paddle could, and more. So the use of game paddles
                    quickly died out. There is one thing you can do with game paddles that you cannot do with joysticks – you

   1. In fact, the PC’s game adapter design was obviously stolen directly from the Apple II.

                                                                                                                       Page 1255

                                  Thi d              t            t d ith F           M k      402
Chapter 24

                     can place four of them on a system and produce a four player game. However, this (obviously) isn’t
                     important to most game designers who generally design their games for only one player.
                                                          A game paddle or set of rudder pedals
                                                          generally provide a single number in the
                                                          range zero through some system dependent
                                                          maximum value.

                                                   0                                                 Maximum
                                                                                                     Reading

                                              Game Paddle or Rudder Pedal Game Input Device
                          Rudder pedals are really nothing more than a specially designed game paddle designed so you can
                     activate them with your feet. Many flight simulator games take advantage of this input device to provide a
                     more realistic experience. Generally, you would use rudder pedals in addition to a joystick device.
                          A joystick contains two pots connected with a stick. Moving the joystick along the x-axis actuates one
                     of the pots, moving the joystick along the y-axis actuates the other pot. By reading both pots, you can
                     roughly determine the absolute position of the pot within its working range.


                                                                                              A joystick uses two independent pots
                                                                                              to provide an (X,Y) input value. Hori-
                                                                                              zontal movements on the joystick af-
                                                                                              fect the x-axis pot independently of
                                                                                              the y-axis pot. Likewise, vertical move-
                                                                                       Y
                                                                                              ments affect the y-axis pot independ-
                                                                                              ent of the x-axis pot. By reading both
                                                                                              pots you can determine the position
                                                                                              of the joystick in the (X,Y) coordinate
                                                                                              system.

                                                                    X


                                                              Joystick Game Input Device
                         An RC simulator is really nothing more than a box containing two joysticks. The yoke and steering
                     wheel devices are essentially the same device, sold specifically for flight simulators or automotive games2.
                     The steering wheel is connected to a pot that corresponds to the x-axis on the joystick. Pulling back (or
                     pushing forward) on the wheel activates a second pot that corresponds to the y-axis on the joystick.
                           Certain joystick devices, generically known as flight sticks, contain three pots. Two pots are con-
                     nected in a standard joystick fashion, the third is connected to a knob which many games use for the throt-
                     tle control. Other joysticks, like the Thrustmasteror CH Products’ FlightStick Pro, include extra switches
                     including a special “cooley switch” that provide additional inputs to the game. The cooley switch is, essen-
                     tially, a digital pot mounted on the top of a joystick. Users can select one of four positions on the cooley
                     switch using their thumb. Most flight simulator programs compatible with such devices use the cooley
                     switch to select different views from the aircraft.




    2. In fact, many such devices are switchable between the two.

Page 1256
                                                                                                    The Game Adapter




                                                               The cooley switch (shown here on a device layout similar
                                                               to the CH Products' FlightStick Pro) is a thumb actuated
                                                               digitial joystick. You can move the switch up, down, left
                                                               or right, activating individual switches inside the game
                                                               input device.




                  Cooley Switch (found on CH Products and Thrustmaster Joysticks)


24.2   The Game Adapter Hardware
                 The game adapter hardware is simplicity itself. There is a single input port and a single output port.
            The input port bit layout is
                                         I/O Address 201h
                                   7     6 5 4 3 2 1                          0



                                                                                       Pot #0 input
                                                                                       Pot #1 input
                                                                                       Pot #2 input
                                                                                       Pot #3 input
                                                                                       Switch #0 input
                                                                                       Switch #1 in put
                                                                                       Switch #2 input
                                                                                       Switch #3 input

                                                Game Adapter Input Port
                 The four switches come in on the H.O. four bits of I/O port 201h. If the user is currently pressing a
            button, the corresponding bit position will contain a zero. If the button is up, the corresponding bit will
            contain a one.
                 The pot inputs might seem strange at first glance. After all, how can we represent one of a large num-
            ber of potential pot positions (say, at least 256) with a single bit? Obviously we can’t. However, the input
            bit on this port does not return any type of numeric value specifying the pot position. Instead, each of the

                                                                                                              Page 1257
Chapter 24

             four pot bits is connected to an input of a resistive sensitive 558 quad timer chip. When you trigger the
             timer chip, it produces an output pulse whose duration is proportional to the resistive input to the timer.
             The output of this timer chip appears as the input bit for a given pot. The schematic for this circuit is
                          Trigger (Write to I/O Address 201h)




                                                                                                  D0
                                                                                                        L.O. Four Bits
                                                                     558                          D1
                                                                                                  D2    on Input Port 201h
                                                                    Timer
                                                                                                  D3




                External Potentiometers


                                            Joystick Schematic
                  Normally, the pot input bits contain zero. When you trigger the timer chip, the pot input lines go high
             for some period of time determined by the current resistance of the potentiometer. By measuring how
             long this bit stays set, you can get a rough estimate of the resistance. To trigger the pots, simply write any
             value to I/O port 201h. The actual value you write is unimportant. The following timing diagram shows
             how the signal varies on each pot’s input bit:


                                           Input on D0..D3 goes high for some
                                           period of time depending on the pot
                                           setting.

                             1



                             0

                                 Trigger
                                 Occurs
                                 Here

                                     Analog Input Timing Signal


Page 1258
                                                                                                                                   The Game Adapter

                     The only remaining question is “how do we determine the length of the pulse?” The following short loop
                     demonstrates one way to determine the width of this timing pulse:
                                              mov               cx, -1                         ;We’re going to count backwards
                                              mov               dx, 201h                       ;Point at joystick port.
                                              out               dx, al                         ;Trigger the timer chip.
                     CntLp:                   in                al, dx                         ;Read joystick port.
                                              test              al, 1                          ;Check pot #0 input.
                                              loopne            CntLp                          ;Repeat while high.
                                              neg               cx                             ;Convert CX to a positive value.

                     When this loop finish execution, the cx register will contain the number of passes made through this loop
                     while the timer output signal was a logic one. The larger the value in cx , the longer the pulse and, there-
                     fore, the greater the resistance of pot #0.
                          There are several minor problems with this code. First of all, the code will obviously produce differ-
                     ent results on different machines running at different clock rates. For example, a 150 MHz Pentium system
                     will execute this code much faster than a 5 MHz 8088 system3. The second problem is that different joy-
                     sticks and different game adapter cards produce radically different timing results. Even on the same system
                     with the same adapter card and joystick, you may not always get consistent readings on different days. It
                     turns out that the 558 is somewhat temperature sensitive and will produce slightly different readings as the
                     temperature changes.
                          Unfortunately, there is no way to design a loop like the above so that it returns consistent readings
                     across a wide variety of machines, potentiometers, and game adapter cards. Therefore, you have to write
                     your application software so that it is insensitive to wide variances in the input values from the analog
                     inputs. Fortunately, this is very easy to do, but more on that later.


24.3     Using BIOS’ Game I/O Functions
                          The BIOS provides two functions for reading game adapter inputs. Both are subfunctions of the
                     int 15h handler.
                          To read the switches, load ah with 84h and dx with zero then execute an int 15h instruction. On
                     return, al will contain the switch readings in the H.O. four bits (see the diagram in the previous section).
                     This function is roughly equivalent to reading port 201h directly.
                           To read the analog inputs, load ah with 84h and dx with one then execute an int 15h instruction. On
                     return, AX, BX, CX, and DX will contain the values for pots zero, one, two, and three, respectively. In prac-
                     tice, this call should return values in the range 0-400h, though you cannot count on this for reasons
                     described in the previous section.
                          Very few programs use the BIOS joystick support. It’s easier to read the switches directly and reading
                     the pots is not that much more work that calling the BIOS routine. The BIOS code is very slow. Most BIO-
                     Ses read the four pots sequentially, taking up to four times longer than a program that reads all four pots
                     concurrently (see the next section). Because reading the pots can take several hundred microseconds up
                     to several milliseconds, most programmers writing high performance games do not use the BIOS calls,
                     they write their own high performance routines instead.
                          This is a real shame. By writing drivers specific to the PC’s original game adapter design, these devel-
                     opers force the user to purchase and use a standard game adapter card and game input device. Were the
                     game to make the BIOS call, third party developers could create different and unique game controllers and
                     then simply supply a driver that replaces the int 15h routine and provides the same programming inter-
                     face. For example, Genovation made a device that lets you plug a joystick into the parallel port of a PC.

   3. Actually, the speed difference is not as great as you would first think. Joystick adapter cards almost always interface to the computer system via
   the ISA bus. The ISA bus runs at only 8 Mhz and requires four clock cycles per data transfer (i.e., 500 ns to read the joystick input port). This is equiv-
   alent to a small number of wait states on a slow machine and a gigantic number of wait states on a fast machine. Tests run on a 5 MHz 8088 system
   vs. a 50 MHz 486DX system produces only a 2:1 to 3:1 speed difference between the two machines even though the 486 machine was over 50 times
   faster for most other computations.

                                                                                                                                               Page 1259
Chapter 24

                     Colorado Spectrum created a similar device that lets you plug a joystick into the serial port. Both devices
                     would let you use a joystick on machines that do not (and, perhaps, cannot) have a game adapter
                     installed. However, games that access the joystick hardware directly will not be compatible with such
                     devices. However, had the game designer made the int 15h call, their software would have been compati-
                     ble since both Colorado Spectrum and Genovation supply int 15h TSRs to reroute joystick calls to use their
                     devices.
                         To help overcome game designer’s aversion to using the int 15h calls, this text will present a high per-
                     formance version of the BIOS’ joystick code a little later in this chapter. Developers who adopt this Stan-
                     dard Game Device Interface will create software that will be compatible with any other device that
                     supports the SGDI standard. For more details, see “The Standard Game Device Interface (SGDI)” on
                     page 1262.


24.4     Writing Your Own Game I/O Routines
                           Consider again the code that returns some value for a given pot setting:
                                                  mov                          cx, -1                                          ;We’re going to count backwards
                                                  mov                          dx, 201h                                        ;Point at joystick port.
                                                  out                          dx, al                                          ;Trigger the timer chip.
                     CntLp:                       in                           al, dx                                          ;Read joystick port.
                                                  test                         al, 1                                           ;Check pot #0 input.
                                                  loopne                       CntLp                                           ;Repeat while high.
                                                  neg                          cx                                              ;Convert CX to a positive value.

                     As mentioned earlier, the big problem with this code is that you are going to get wildly different ranges of
                     values from different game adapter cards, input devices, and computer systems. Clearly you cannot count
                     on the code above always producing a value in the range 0..180h under these conditions. Your software
                     will need to dynamically adjust the values it uses depending on the system parameters.
                          You’ve probably played a game on the PC where the software asks you to calibrate the joystick
                     before use. Calibration generally consists of moving the joystick handle to one corner (e.g., the upper-left
                     corner), pressing a button or key and them moving the handle to the opposite corner (e.g., lower-right)
                     and pressing a button again. Some systems even want you to move the joystick to the center position and
                     press a button as well.
                          Software that does this is reading the minimum, maximum, and centered values from the joystick.
                     Given at least the minimum and maximum values, you can easily scale any reading to any range you want.
                     By reading the centered value as well, you can get slightly better results, especially on really inexpensive
                     (cheap) joysticks. This process of scaling a reading to a certain range is known as normalization. By read-
                     ing the minimum and maximum values from the user and normalizing every reading thereafter, you can
                     write your programs assuming that the values always fall within a certain range, for example, 0..255. To
                     normalize a reading is very easy, you simply use the following formula:


                                         ( CurrentReading – MinimumReading )
                                     ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- × NormalValue
                                      ( MaximumReading – MinimumReading )



                          The MaximumReading and MinimumReading values are the minimum and maximum values
                     read from the user at the beginning of your application. CurrentReading is the value just read from the
                     game adapter. NormalValue is the upper bounds on the range to which you want to normalize the
                     reading (e.g., 255), the lower bound is always zero4.



    4. If you want a different lower bound, just add whatever value you want fro the lowest value to the result. You will also need to subtract this lower
    bound from the NormalValue variable in the above equation.

Page 1260
                                                                                                                                                            The Game Adapter

                       To get better results, especially when using a joystick, you should obtain three readings during the
                  calibration phase for each pot – a minimum value, a maximum value, and a centered value. To normalize
                  a reading when you’ve got these three values, you would use one of the following formulae:
                        If the current reading is in the range minimum..center, use this formula:
                                                           ( Current – Center )
                                                   ----------------------------------------------------------------- × NormalValue
                                                    ( Center – Minimum ) × 2

                        If the current reading is in the range center..maximum, use this formula:
                                          ( Current – Center )                                                       NormalValue
                                  ------------------------------------------------------------------ × NormalValue + ------------------------------------
                                   ( Maximum – Center ) × 2                                                                          2

                       A large number of games on the market today jump through all kinds of hoops trying to coerce joy-
                  stick readings into a reasonable range. It is surprising how few of them use that simple formula above.
                  Some game designers might argue that the formulae above are overly complex and they are writing high
                  performance games. This is nonsense. It takes two orders of magnitude more time to wait for the joystick
                  to time out than it does to compute the above equations. So use them and make your programs easier to
                  write.
                       Although normalizing your pot readings takes so little time it is always worthwhile, reading the ana-
                  log inputs is a very expensive operation in terms of CPU cycles. Since the timer circuit produces relatively
                  fixed time delays for a given resistance, you will waste even more CPU cycles on a fast machine than you
                  do on a slow machine (although reading the pot takes about the same amount of real time on any
                  machine). One sure fire way to waste a lot of time is to read several pots one at a time; for example, when
                  reading pots zero and one to get a joystick reading, read pot zero first and then read pot one afterwards. It
                  turns out that you can easily read both pots in parallel. By doing so, you can speed up reading the joystick
                  by a factor of two. Consider the following code:
                                              mov                         cx, 1000h                                      ;Max times through loop
                                              mov                         si, 0                                          ;We’ll put readings in SI and
                                              mov                         di, si                                         ; di.
                                              mov                         ax, si                                         ;Set AH to zero.
                                              mov                         dx, 201h                                       ;Point at joystick port.
                                              out                         dx, al                                         ;Trigger the timer chip.
                  CntLp:                      in                          al, dx                                         ;Read joystick port.
                                              and                         al, 11b                                        ;Strip unwanted bits.
                                              jz                          Done
                                              shr                         ax, 1                                          ;Put pot 0 value into carry.
                                              adc                         si, 0                                          ;Bump pot 0 value if still active.
                                              add                         di, ax                                         ;Bump pot 1 value if pot 1 active.
                                              loop                        CntLp                                          ;Repeat while high.
                                              and                         si, 0FFFh                                      ;If time-out, force the register(s)
                                              and                         di, 0FFFh                                      ; containing 1000h to zero.

                  Done:

                        This code reads both pot zero and pot one at the same time. It works by looping while either pot is
                  active5. Each time through the loop, this code adds the pots’ bit values to separate register that accumula-
                  tor the result. When this loop terminates, si and di contain the readings for both pots zero and one.
                       Although this particular loop contains more instructions than the previous loop, it still takes the same
                  amount of time to execute. Remember, the output pulses on the 558 timer determine how long this code
                  takes to execute, the number of instructions in the loop contribute very little to the execution time. How-
                  ever, the time this loop takes to execute one iteration of the loop does effect the resolution of this joystick
                  read routine. The faster the loop executes, the more iterations the loop will run during the same timing
                  period and the finer will be the measurement. Generally, though, the resolution of the above code is much
                  greater than the accuracy of the electronics and game input device, so this isn’t much of a concern.



5. This code provides a time-out feature in the event there is no game adapter installed. In such an event this code forces the readings to zero.

                                                                                                                                                                   Page 1261
Chapter 24

                          The code above demonstrates how to read two pots. It is very easy to extend this code to read three
                     or four pots. An example of such a routine appears in the section on the SGDI device driver for the stan-
                     dard game adapter card.
                          The other game device input, the switches, would seem to be simple in comparison to the potentiom-
                     eter inputs. As usual, things are not as easy as they would seem at first glance. The switch inputs have
                     some problems of their own.
                          The first issue is keybounce. The switches on a typical joystick are probably an order of magnitude
                     worse than the keys on the cheapest keyboard. Keybounce, and lots of it, is a fact you’re going to have to
                     deal with when reading joystick switches. In general, you shouldn’t read the joystick switches more often
                     than once every 10 msec. Many games read the switches on the 55 msec timer interrupt. For example, sup-
                     pose your timer interrupt reads the switches and stores the result in a memory variable. The main applica-
                     tion, when wanting to fire a weapon, checks the variable. If it’s set, the main program clears the variable
                     and fires the weapon. Fifty-five milliseconds later, the timer sets the button variable again and the main
                     program will fire again the next time it checks the variable. Such a scheme will totally eliminate the prob-
                     lems with keybounce.
                           The technique above solves another problem with the switches: keeping track of when the button
                     first goes down. Remember, when you read the switches, the bits that come back tell you that the switch is
                     currently down. It does not tell you that the button was just pressed. You have to keep track of this your-
                     self. One easy way to detect when a user first presses a button is to save the previous switch reading and
                     compare it against the current reading. If they are different and the current reading indicates a switch
                     depression, then this is a new switch down.


24.5     The Standard Game Device Interface (SGDI)
                          The Standard Game Device Interface (SGDI) is a specification for an int 15h service that lets you read
                     an arbitrary number of pots and joysticks. Writing SGDI compliant applications is easy and helps make
                     your software compatible with any game device which provides SGDI compliance. By writing your appli-
                     cations to use the SGDI API you can ensure that your applications will work with future devices that pro-
                     vide extended SGDI capability. To understand the power and extensibility of the SGDI, you need to take a
                     look at the application programmer’s interface (API) for the SGDI.


24.5.1        Application Programmer’s Interface (API)
                          The SGDI interface extends the PC’s joystick BIOS int 15h API. You make SGDI calls by loading the
                     80x86 ah register with 84h and dx with an appropriate SGDI function code and then executing an int 15h
                     instruction. The SGDI interface simply extends the functionality of the built-in BIOS routines. Note that
                     and program that calls the standard BIOS joystick routines will work with an SGDI driver. The following
                     table lists each of the SGDI functions:


                            Table 87: SGDI Functions and API (int 15h, ah=84h)
  DH        Inputs              Outputs             Description
   00       dl = 0              al - Switch         Read4Sw. This is the standard BIOS subfunction zero call. This reads the
                                readings            status of the first four switches and returns their values in the upper four
                                                    bits of the al register.
   00       dl = 1              ax- pot 0           Read4Pots. Standard BIOS subfunction one call. Reads all four pots (con-
                                bx - pot 1          currently) and returns their raw values in ax, bx , cx , and dx as per BIOS
                                cx - pot 2          specifications.
                                dx - pot 3


Page 1262
                                                                                                            The Game Adapter

                         Table 87: SGDI Functions and API (int 15h, ah=84h)
  DH     Inputs              Outputs               Description
  01     dl = pot #          al = pot reading      ReadPot. This function reads a pot and returns a normalized reading in
                                                   the range 0..255.
  02     dl = 0              al = pot 0            Read4. This routine reads the four pots on the standard game adapter card
         al = pot mask       ah = pot 1            just like the Read4Pots function above. However, this routine normalizes
                             dl = pot 2            the four values to the range 0..255 and returns those values in al, ah, dl ,
                             dh = pot 3            and dh. On entry, the al register contains a “pot mask” that you can use to
                                                   select which of the four pots this routine actually reads.
  03     dl = pot #                                Calibrate. This function calibrates the pots for those calls that return nor-
         al = minimum                              malized values. You must calibrate the pots before calling any such pot
         bx= maximum                               functions (ReadPot and Read4 above). The input values must be raw pot
         cx= centered                              readings obtained by Read4Pots or other function that returns raw values.
  04     dl = pot #          al = 0 if not cal-    TestPotCalibrate. Checks to see if the specified pot has already been cali-
                             ibrated, 1 if cali-   brated. Returns an appropriate value in al denoting the calibration status
                             brated.               for the specified pot. See the note above about the need for calibration.
  05     dl = pot #          ax = raw value        ReadRaw. Reads a raw value from the specified pot. You can use this call
                                                   to get the raw values required by the calibrate routine, above.
  08     dl = switch #       ax = switch           ReadSw. Read the specified switch and returns zero (switch up) or one
                             value                 (switch down) in the ax register.
  09                         ax = switch val-      Read16Sw. This call lets an application read up to 16 switches on a game
                             ues                   device at a time. Bit zero of ax corresponds to switch zero, bit 15 of ax
                                                   corresponds to switch fifteen.
  80h                                              Remove. This function removes the driver from memory. Application pro-
                                                   grams generally won’t make this call.
  81h                                              TestPresence. This routine returns zero in the ax register if an SGDI driver
                                                   is present in memory. It returns ax’s value unchanged otherwise (in par-
                                                   ticular, ah will still contain 84h).


24.5.2     Read4Sw
                       Inputs: ah= 84h, dx = 0
                        This is the standard BIOS read switches call. It returns the status switches zero through three on the
                  joystick in the upper four bits of the al register. Bit four corresponds to switch zero, bit five to switch one,
                  bit six to switch two, and bit seven to switch three. One zero in each bit position denotes a depressed
                  switch, a one bit corresponds to a switch in the up position. This call is provided for compatibility with the
                  existing BIOS joystick routines. To read the joystick switches you should use the Read16Sw call
                  described later in this document.


24.5.3     Read4Pots:
                       Inputs: ah= 84h, dx = 1
                       This is the standard BIOS read pots call. It reads the four pots on the standard game adapter card and
                  returns their readings in the ax (x axis/pot 0), bx (y axis/pot 1), cx (pot 2), and dx (pot 3) registers.
                  These are raw, uncalibrated, pot readings whose values will differ from machine to machine and vary
                  depending upon the game I/O card in use. This call is provided for compatibility with the existing BIOS



                                                                                                                      Page 1263
Chapter 24

                    joystick routines. To read the pots you should use the ReadPot, Read4, or ReadRaw routines described
                    in the next several sections.


24.5.4       ReadPot
                         Inputs: ah=84h, dh=1, dl =Pot number.
                         This reads the specified pot and returns a normalized pot value in the range 0..255 in the al register.
                    This routine also sets ah to zero. Although the SGDI standard provides for up to 255 different pots, most
                    adapters only support pots zero, one, two, and three. If you attempt to read any nonsupported pot this
                    function returns zero in ax. Since the values are normalized, this call returns comparable values for a
                    given game control setting regardless of machine, clock frequency, or game I/O card in use. For example,
                    a reading of 128 corresponds (roughly) to the center setting on almost any machine. To properly produce
                    normalized results, you must calibrate a given pot before making this call. See the CalibratePot routine
                    for more details.


24.5.5       Read4:
                         Inputs: ah = 84h, al = pot mask, dx=0200h
                         This routine reads the four pots on the game adapter card, just like the BIOS call (Read4Pots).
                    However, it returns normalized values in al (x axis/pot 0), ah (y axis/pot 1), dl (pot 2), and dh (pot 3).
                    Since this routine returns normalized values between zero and 255, you must calibrate the pots before call-
                    ing this code. The al register contains a “pot mask” value. The L.O. four bits of al determine if this routine
                    will actually read each pot. If bit zero, one, two, or three is one, then this function will read the corre-
                    sponding pot; if the bits are zero, this routine will not read the corresponding pot and will return zero in
                    the corresponding register.


24.5.6       CalibratePot
                         Inputs: ah=84h, dh=3, dl =pot #, al=minimum value, bx =maximum value, cx =centered value.
                          Before you attempt to read a pot with the ReadPot or Read4 routines, you need to calibrate that
                    pot. If you read a pot without first calibrating it, the SGDI driver will return only zero for that pot reading.
                    To calibrate a pot you will need to read raw values for the pot in a minimum position, maximum position,
                    and a centered position6. These must be raw pot readings. Use readings obtained by the Read4Pots rou-
                    tine. In theory, you need only calibrate a pot once after loading the SGDI driver. However, temperature
                    fluctuations and analog circuitry drift may decalibrate a pot after considerable use. Therefore, you should
                    recalibrate the pots you intend to read each time the user runs your application. Furthermore, you should
                    give the user the option of recalibrating the pots at any time within your program.


24.5.7       TestPotCalibration
                         Inputs: ah= 84h, dh=4 , dl = pot #.
                         This routine returns zero or one in ax denoting not calibrated or calibrated, respectively. You can
                    use the call to see if the pots you intend to use have already been calibrated and you can skip the calibra-
                    tion phase. Please, however, note the comments about drift in the previous paragraph.




    6. Many programmers compute the centered value as the arithmetic mean of the minimum and maximum values.

Page 1264
                                                                                                     The Game Adapter


24.5.8   ReadRaw
                 Inputs: ah = 84h, dh = 5, dl = pot #
                 Reads the specified pot and returns a raw (not calibrated) value in ax. You can use this routine to
            obtain minimum, centered, and maximum values for use when calling the calibrate routine.


24.5.9   ReadSwitch
                 Inputs: ah= 84h, dh = 8, dl = switch #
                 This routine reads the specified switch and returns zero in ax if the switch is not depressed. It returns
            one if the switch is depressed. Note that this value is opposite the bit settings the Read4Sw function
            returns.
                If you attempt to read a switch number for an input that is not available on the current device, the
            SGDI driver will return zero (switch up). Standard game devices only support switches zero through three
            and most joysticks only provide two switches. Therefore, unless you are willing to tie your application to a
            specific device, you shouldn’t use any switches other than zero or one.


24.5.10 Read16Sw
                 Inputs: ah = 84h, dh = 9
                  This SGDI routine reads up to sixteen switches with a single call. It returns a bit vector in the ax reg-
            ister with bit 0 corresponding to switch zero, bit one corresponding to switch one, etc. Ones denote switch
            depressed and zeros denote switches not depressed. Since the standard game adapter only supports four
            switches, only bits zero through three of al contain meaningful data (for those devices). All other bits will
            always contain zero. SGDI drivers for the CH Product’s Flightstick Pro and Thrustmaster joysticks will
            return bits for the entire set of switches available on those devices.


24.5.11 Remove
                 Inputs: ah= 84h, dh= 80h
                  This call will attempt to remove the SGDI driver from memory. Generally, only the SGDI.EXE code
            itself would invoke this routine. You should use the TestPresence routine (described next) to see if the
            driver was actually removed from memory by this call.


24.5.12 TestPresence
                 Inputs: ah=84h, dh=81h
                 If an SGDI driver is present in memory, this routine return ax=0 and a pointer to an identification
            string in es:bx. If an SGDI driver is not present, this call will return ax unchanged.


24.5.13 An SGDI Driver for the Standard Game Adapter Card
                If you write your program to make SGDI calls, you will discover that the TestPresence call will
            probably return “not present” when your program searches for a resident SGDI driver in memory. This is
            because few manufacturers provide SGDI drivers at this point and even fewer standard game adapter


                                                                                                               Page 1265
Chapter 24

                     companies ship any software at all with their products, much less an SGDI driver. Gee, what kind of stan-
                     dard is this if no one uses it? Well, the purpose of this section is to rectify that problem.
                          The assembly code that appears at the end of this section provides a fully functional, public domain,
                     SGDI driver for the standard game adapter card (the next section present an SGDI driver for the CH Prod-
                     ucts’ Flightstick Pro). This allows you to write your application making only SGDI calls. By supplying the
                     SGDI TSR with your product, your customers can use your software with all standard joysticks. Later, if
                     they purchase a specialized device with its own SGDI driver, your software will automatically work with
                     that driver with no changes to your software7.
                          If you do not like the idea of having a user run a TSR before your application, you can always include
                     the following code within your program’s code space and activate it if the SGDI TestPresence call
                     determines that no other SGDI driver is present in memory when you start your program.
                           Here’s the complete code for the standard game adapter SGDI driver:
                                             .286
                                             page              58, 132
                                             name              SGDI
                                             title             SGDI Driver for Standard Game Adapter Card
                                             subttl            This Program is Public Domain Material.

                     ;   SGDI.EXE
                     ;
                     ;             Usage:
                     ;                   SDGI
                     ;
                     ;   This program loads a TSR which patches INT 15 so arbitrary game programs
                     ;   can read the joystick in a portable fashion.
                     ;
                     ;
                     ;   We need to load cseg in memory before any other segments!

                     cseg                    segment           para public ‘code’
                     cseg                    ends


                     ; Initialization code, which we do not need except upon initial load,
                     ; goes in the following segment:

                     Initialize              segment           para public ‘INIT’
                     Initialize              ends

                     ; UCR Standard Library routines which get dumped later on.

                                             .xlist
                                             include        stdlib.a
                                             includelib stdlib.lib
                                             .list

                     sseg                    segment           para stack ‘stack’
                     sseg                    ends

                     zzzzzzseg               segment           para public ‘zzzzzzseg’
                     zzzzzzseg               ends



                     CSEG                    segment           para public ‘CODE’
                                             assume            cs:cseg, ds:nothing

                     wp                      equ               <word ptr>
                     byp                     equ               <byte ptr>

                     Int15Vect               dword             0

                     PSP                     word              ?


    7. Of course, your software may not take advantage of extra features, like additional switches and pots, but at least your software will support the
    standard set of features on that device.

Page 1266
                                                                 The Game Adapter


; Port addresses for a typical joystick card:

JoyPort         equ        201h
JoyTrigger      equ        201h

; Data structure to hold information about each pot.
; (mainly for calibration and normalization purposes).

Pot             struc
PotMask         byte       0                ;Pot mask for hardware.
DidCal          byte       0                ;Is this pot calibrated?
min             word       5000             ;Minimum pot value
max             word       0                ;Max pot value
center          word       0                ;Pot value in the middle
Pot             ends

; Variables for each of the pots. Must initialize the masks so they
; mask out all the bits except the incomming bit for each pot.

Pot0            Pot        <1>
Pot1            Pot        <2>
Pot2            Pot        <4>
Pot3            Pot        <8>



; The IDstring address gets passed back to the caller on a testpresence
; call. The four bytes before the IDstring must contain the serial number
; and current driver number.

SerialNumber    byte       0,0,0
IDNumber        byte       0
IDString        byte       “Standard SGDI Driver”,0
                byte       “Public Domain Driver Written by Randall L. Hyde”,0


;============================================================================
;
; ReadPots-    AH contains a bit mask to determine which pots we should read.
;               Bit 0 is one if we should read pot 0, bit 1 is one if we should
;               read pot 1, bit 2 is one if we should read pot 2, bit 3 is one
;               if we should read pot 3. All other bits will be zero.
;
;        This code returns the pot values in SI, BX, BP, and DI for Pot 0, 1,
;        2, & 3.
;

ReadPots        proc       near
                sub        bp, bp
                mov        si, bp
                mov        di, bp
                mov        bx, bp

;   Wait for any previous signals to finish up before trying to read this
;   guy. It is possible that the last pot we read was very short. However,
;   the trigger signal starts timers running for all four pots. This code
;   terminates as soon as the current pot times out. If the user immediately
;   reads another pot, it is quite possible that the new pot’s timer has
;   not yet expired from the previous read. The following loop makes sure we
;   aren’t measuring the time from the previous read.

                mov        dx, JoyPort
                mov        cx, 400h
Wait4Clean:     in         al, dx
                and        al, 0Fh
                loopnz     Wait4Clean

;   Okay, read the pots. The following code triggers the 558 timer chip
;   and then sits in a loop until all four pot bits (masked with the pot mask
;   in AL) become zero. Each time through this loop that one or more of these
;   bits contain zero, this loop increments the corresponding register(s).

                mov        dx, JoyTrigger


                                                                        Page 1267
Chapter 24

                            out       dx, al              ;Trigger pots
                            mov       dx, JoyPort
                            mov       cx, 1000h           ;Don’t let this go on forever.
             PotReadLoop:   in        al, dx
                            and       al, ah
                            jz        PotReadDone
                            shr       al, 1
                            adc       si, 0               ;Increment SI if pot 0 still active.
                            shr       al, 1
                            adc       bx, 0            ;Increment BX if pot 1 still active.
                            shr       al, 1
                            adc       bp, 0            ;Increment BP if pot 2 still active.
                            shr       al, 1
                            adc       di, 0            ;Increment DI if pot 3 still active.
                            loop      PotReadLoop      ;Stop, eventually, if funny hardware.

                            and       si,   0FFFh      ;If we drop through to this point,
                            and       bx,   0FFFh      ; one or more pots timed out (usually
                            and       bp,   0FFFh      ; because they are not connected).
                            and       di,   0FFFh      ; The reg contains 4000h, set it to 0.
             PotReadDone:   ret
             ReadPots       endp



             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ;
             ; Normalize- BX contains a pointer to a pot structure, AX contains
             ;             a pot value. Normalize that value according to the
             ;             calibrated pot.
             ;
             ; Note: DS must point at cseg before calling this routine.


                            assume    ds:cseg
             Normalize      proc      near
                            push      cx

             ; Sanity check to make sure the calibration process went okay.

                            cmp       [bx].Pot.DidCal, 0 ;Is this pot calibrated?
                            je        BadNorm           ;If not, quit.

                            mov       dx, [bx].Pot.Center   ;Do a sanity check on the
                            cmp       dx, [bx].Pot.Min ;    min, center, and max
                            jbe       BadNorm           ;   values to make sure
                            cmp       dx, [bx].Pot.Max ;    min < center < max.
                            jae       BadNorm

             ; Clip the value if it is out of range.

                            cmp       ax, [bx].Pot.Min    ;If the value is less than
                            ja        MinOkay             ; the minimum value, set it
                            mov       ax, [bx].Pot.Min    ; to the minimum value.
             MinOkay:

                            cmp       ax, [bx].Pot.Max    ;If the value is greater than
                            jb        MaxOkay             ; the maximum value, set it
                            mov       ax, [bx].Pot.Max    ; to the maximum value.
             MaxOkay:

             ; Scale this guy around the center:

                            cmp       ax, [bx].Pot.Center ;See if less than or greater
                            jb        Lower128          ; than centered value.

             ; Okay, current reading is greater than the centered value, scale the reading
             ; into the range 128..255 here:

                            sub       ax,   [bx].Pot.Center
                            mov       dl,   ah            ;Multiply by 128
                            mov       ah,   al
                            mov       dh,   0
                            mov       al,   dh


Page 1268
                                                                  The Game Adapter

              shr        dl, 1
              rcr        ax, 1
              mov        cx, [bx].Pot.Max
              sub        cx, [bx].Pot.Center
              jz         BadNorm           ;Prevent division by zero.
              div        cx                ;Compute normalized value.
              add        ax, 128           ;Scale to range 128..255.
              cmp        ah, 0
              je         NormDone
              mov        ax, 0ffh          ;Result must fit in 8 bits!
              jmp        NormDone

; If the reading is below the centered value, scale it into the range
; 0..127 here:

Lower128:     sub        ax, [bx].Pot.Min
              mov        dl, ah
              mov        ah, al
              mov        dh, 0
              mov        al, dh
              shr        dl, 1
              rcr        ax, 1
              mov        cx, [bx].Pot.Center
              sub        cx, [bx].Pot.Min
              jz         BadNorm
              div        cx
              cmp        ah, 0
              je         NormDone
              mov        ax, 0ffh
              jmp        NormDone

; If something went wrong, return zero as the normalized value.

BadNorm:      sub        ax, ax

NormDone:     pop        cx
              ret
Normalize     endp
              assume     ds:nothing

;============================================================================
; INT 15h handler functions.
;============================================================================
;
; Although these are defined as near procs, they are not really procedures.
; The MyInt15 code jumps to each of these with BX, a far return address, and
; the flags sitting on the stack. Each of these routines must handle the
; stack appropriately.
;
;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
; BIOS- Handles the two BIOS calls, DL=0 to read the switches, DL=1 to
;        read the pots. For the BIOS routines, we’ll ignore the cooley
;        switch (the hat) and simply read the other four switches.

BIOS          proc       near
              cmp        dl, 1             ;See if switch or pot routine.
              jb         Read4Sw
              je         ReadBIOSPots

; If not a valid BIOS call, jump to the original INT 15 handler and
; let it take care of this call.

              pop        bx
              jmp        cs:Int15Vect      ;Let someone else handle it!

; BIOS read switches function.

Read4Sw:      push       dx
              mov        dx, JoyPort
              in         al, dx
              and        al, 0F0h          ;Return only switch values.
              pop        dx
              pop        bx
              iret


                                                                         Page 1269
Chapter 24


             ; BIOS read pots function.

             ReadBIOSPots: pop        bx                 ;Return a value in BX!
                           push       si
                           push       di
                           push       bp
                           mov        ah, 0Fh            ;Read all four pots.
                           call       ReadPots
                           mov        ax, si
                           mov        cx, bp             ;BX already contains pot 1 reading.
                           mov        dx, di
                           pop        bp
                           pop        di
                           pop        si
                           iret
             BIOS          endp

             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ;
             ; ReadPot-    On entry, DL contains a pot number to read.
             ;             Read and normalize that pot and return the result in AL.

                           assume     ds:cseg
             ReadPot       proc       near
             ;;;;;;;;;;    push       bx                 ;Already on stack.
                           push       ds
                           push       cx
                           push       dx
                           push       si
                           push       di
                           push       bp

                           mov        bx, cseg
                           mov        ds, bx

             ; If dl = 0, read and normalize the value for pot 0, if not, try some
             ; other pot.

                           cmp        dl, 0
                           jne        Try1
                           mov        ah, Pot0.PotMask   ;Get bit for this pot.
                           call       ReadPots           ;Read pot 0.
                           lea        bx, Pot0           ;Pointer to pot data.
                           mov        ax, si             ;Get pot 0 reading.
                           call       Normalize          ;Normalize to 0..FFh.
                           jmp        GotPot             ;Return to caller.

             ; Test for DL=1 here (read and normalize pot 1).

             Try1:         cmp        dl, 1
                           jne        Try2
                           mov        ah, Pot1.PotMask
                           call       ReadPots
                           mov        ax, bx
                           lea        bx, Pot1
                           call       Normalize
                           jmp        GotPot

             ; Test for DL=2 here (read and normalize pot 2).

             Try2:         cmp        dl, 2
                           jne        Try3
                           mov        ah, Pot2.PotMask
                           call       ReadPots
                           lea        bx, Pot2
                           mov        ax, bp
                           call       Normalize
                           jmp        GotPot

             ; Test for DL=3 here (read and normalize pot 3).

             Try3:         cmp        dl, 3
                           jne        BadPot


Page 1270
                                                                 The Game Adapter

              mov        ah, Pot3.PotMask
              call       ReadPots
              lea        bx, Pot3
              mov        ax, di
              call       Normalize
              jmp        GotPot

; Bad value in DL if we drop to this point. The standard game card
; only supports four pots.

BadPot:       sub        ax, ax             ;Pot not available, return zero.
GotPot:       pop        bp
              pop        di
              pop        si
              pop        dx
              pop        cx
              pop        ds
              pop        bx
              iret
ReadPot       endp
              assume     ds:nothing


;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
;
; ReadRaw-    On entry, DL contains a pot number to read.
;             Read that pot and return the unnormalized result in AX.

              assume     ds:cseg
ReadRaw       proc       near
;;;;;;;;;;    push       bx                 ;Already on stack.
              push       ds
              push       cx
              push       dx
              push       si
              push       di
              push       bp

              mov        bx, cseg
              mov        ds, bx

; This code is almost identical to the ReadPot code. The only difference
; is that we don’t bother normalizing the result and (of course) we return
; the value in AX rather than AL.

              cmp        dl, 0
              jne        Try1
              mov        ah, Pot0.PotMask
              call       ReadPots
              mov        ax, si
              jmp        GotPot

Try1:         cmp        dl, 1
              jne        Try2
              mov        ah, Pot1.PotMask
              call       ReadPots
              mov        ax, bx
              jmp        GotPot

Try2:         cmp        dl, 2
              jne        Try3
              mov        ah, Pot2.PotMask
              call       ReadPots
              mov        ax, bp
              jmp        GotPot

Try3:         cmp        dl, 3
              jne        BadPot
              mov        ah, Pot3.PotMask
              call       ReadPots
              mov        ax, di
              jmp        GotPot

BadPot:       sub        ax, ax             ;Pot not available, return zero.


                                                                        Page 1271
Chapter 24

             GotPot:       pop        bp
                           pop        di
                           pop        si
                           pop        dx
                           pop        cx
                           pop        ds
                           pop        bx
                           iret
             ReadRaw       endp
                           assume     ds:nothing


             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ; Read4Pots- Reads pots zero, one, two, and three returning their
             ;             values in AL, AH, DL, and DH.
             ;
             ;             On entry, AL contains the pot mask to select which pots
             ;             we should read (bit 0=1 for pot 0, bit 1=1 for pot 1, etc).

             Read4Pots     proc       near
             ;;;;;;;;;;;   push       bx                ;Already on stack
                           push       ds
                           push       cx
                           push       si
                           push       di
                           push       bp

                           mov        dx, cseg
                           mov        ds, dx

                           mov        ah, al
                           call       ReadPots

                           push       bx                ;Save pot 1 reading.
                           mov        ax, si            ;Get pot 0 reading.
                           lea        bx, Pot0          ;Point bx at pot0 vars.
                           call       Normalize         ;Normalize.
                           mov        cl, al            ;Save for later.

                           pop        ax                ;Retreive pot 1 reading.
                           lea        bx, Pot1
                           call       Normalize
                           mov        ch, al            ;Save normalized value.

                           mov        ax, bp
                           lea        bx, Pot2
                           call       Normalize
                           mov        dl, al            ;Pot 2 value.

                           mov        ax, di
                           lea        bx, Pot3
                           call       Normalize
                           mov        dh, al            ;Pot 3 value.
                           mov        ax, cx            ;Pots 0 and 1.

                           pop        bp
                           pop        di
                           pop        si
                           pop        cx
                           pop        ds
                           pop        bx
                           iret
             Read4Pots     endp




             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ; CalPot-     Calibrate the pot specified by DL. On entry, AL contains
             ;             the minimum pot value (it better be less than 256!), BX
             ;             contains the maximum pot value, and CX contains the centered
             ;             pot value.

                           assume     ds:cseg


Page 1272
                                                               The Game Adapter

CalPot        proc       near
              pop        bx                ;Retrieve maximum value
              push       ds
              push       si
              mov        si, cseg
              mov        ds, si

; Sanity check on parameters, sort them in ascending order:

              mov        ah, 0
              cmp        bx, cx            ;Make sure center < max
              ja         GoodMax
              xchg       bx, cx
GoodMax:      cmp        ax, cx            ;Make sure min < center.
              jb         GoodMin           ; (note: may make center<max).
              xchg       ax, cx
GoodMin:      cmp        cx, bx            ;Again, be sure center < max.
              jb         GoodCenter
              xchg       cx, bx
GoodCenter:


; Okay, figure out who were supposed to calibrate:

              lea        si, Pot0
              cmp        dl, 1
              jb         DoCal             ;Branch if this is pot 0
              lea        si, Pot1
              je         DoCal             ;Branch if this is pot 1
              lea        si, Pot2
              cmp        dl, 3
              jb         DoCal             ;Branch if this is pot 2
              jne        CalDone           ;Branch if not pot 3
              lea        si, Pot3

DoCal:        mov        [si].Pot.min, ax ;Store away the minimum,
              mov        [si].Pot.max, bx ; maximum, and
              mov        [si].Pot.center, cx ; centered values.
              mov        [si].Pot.DidCal, 1 ;Note we’ve cal’d this pot.
CalDone:      pop        si
              pop        ds
              iret
CalPot        endp
              assume     ds:nothing


;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
; TestCal-    Just checks to see if the pot specified by DL has already
;             been calibrated.

              assume     ds:cseg
TestCal       proc       near
;;;;;;;;      push       bx            ;Already on stack
              push       ds
              mov        bx, cseg
              mov        ds, bx

              sub        ax, ax        ;Assume no calibration (also zeros AH)
              lea        bx, Pot0      ;Get the address of the specified
              cmp        dl, 1         ; pot’s data structure into the
              jb         GetCal        ; BX register.
              lea        bx, Pot1
              je         GetCal
              lea        bx, Pot2
              cmp        dl, 3
              jb         GetCal
              jne        BadCal
              lea        bx, Pot3

GetCal:       mov        al, [bx].Pot.DidCal
BadCal:       pop        ds
              pop        bx
              iret
TestCal       endp


                                                                      Page 1273
Chapter 24

                           assume     ds:nothing


             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ;
             ; ReadSw-     Reads the switch whose switch number appears in DL.

             ReadSw        proc       near
             ;;;;;;;       push       bx                 ;Already on stack
                           push       cx

                           sub        ax, ax          ;Assume no such switch.
                           cmp        dl, 3           ;Return if the switch number is
                           ja         NotDown         ; greater than three.

                           mov        cl,   dl        ;Save switch to read.
                           add        cl,   4         ;Move from position four down to zero.
                           mov        dx,   JoyPort
                           in         al,   dx        ;Read the switches.
                           shr        al,   cl        ;Move desired switch bit into bit 0.
                           xor        al,   1         ;Invert so sw down=1.
                           and        ax,   1         ;Remove other junk bits.
             NotDown:      pop        cx
                           pop        bx
                           iret
             ReadSw        endp


             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ;
             ; Read16Sw-   Reads all four switches and returns their values in AX.

             Read16Sw      proc       near
             ;;;;;;;;      push       bx                 ;Already on stack
                           mov        dx, JoyPort
                           in         al, dx
                           shr        al, 4
                           xor        al, 0Fh            ;Invert all switches.
                           and        ax, 0Fh            ;Set other bits to zero.
                           pop        bx
                           iret
             Read16Sw      endp


             ;****************************************************************************
             ;
             ; MyInt15-    Patch for the BIOS INT 15 routine to control reading the
             ;             joystick.

             MyInt15       proc       far
                           push       bx
                           cmp        ah, 84h            ;Joystick code?
                           je         DoJoystick
             OtherInt15:   pop        bx
                           jmp        cs:Int15Vect

             DoJoystick:   mov        bh, 0
                           mov        bl, dh
                           cmp        bl, 80h
                           jae        VendorCalls
                           cmp        bx, JmpSize
                           jae        OtherInt15
                           shl        bx, 1
                           jmp        wp cs:jmptable[bx]

             jmptable      word       BIOS
                           word       ReadPot, Read4Pots, CalPot, TestCal
                           word       ReadRaw, OtherInt15, OtherInt15
                           word       ReadSw, Read16Sw
             JmpSize       =          ($-jmptable)/2


             ; Handle vendor specific calls here.



Page 1274
                                                                  The Game Adapter

VendorCalls:    je        RemoveDriver
                cmp       bl, 81h
                je        TestPresence
                pop       bx
                jmp       cs:Int15Vect


; TestPresence- Returns zero in AX and a pointer to the ID string in ES:BX

TestPresence: pop         bx               ;Get old value off stack.
              sub         ax,   ax
              mov         bx,   cseg
              mov         es,   bx
              lea         bx,   IDString
              iret

; RemoveDriver-If there are no other drivers loaded after this one in
;              memory, disconnect it and remove it from memory.

RemoveDriver:
                push      ds
                push      es
                push      ax
                push      dx

                mov       dx, cseg
                mov       ds, dx

; See if we’re the last routine patched into INT 15h

                mov       ax, 3515h
                int       21h
                cmp       bx, offset MyInt15
                jne       CantRemove
                mov       bx, es
                cmp       bx, wp seg MyInt15
                jne       CantRemove

                mov       ax,   PSP        ;Free the memory we’re in
                mov       es,   ax
                push      es
                mov       ax,   es:[2ch]   ;First, free env block.
                mov       es,   ax
                mov       ah,   49h
                int       21h

                pop       es               ;Now free program space.
                mov       ah, 49h
                int       21h

                lds       dx, Int15Vect    ;Restore previous int vect.
                mov       ax, 2515h
                int       21h

CantRemove:     pop       dx
                pop       ax
                pop       es
                pop       ds
                pop       bx
                iret
MyInt15         endp
cseg            ends



Initialize      segment   para public ‘INIT’
                assume    cs:Initialize, ds:cseg
Main            proc
                mov       ax, cseg         ;Get ptr to vars segment
                mov       es, ax
                mov       es:PSP, ds       ;Save PSP value away
                mov       ds, ax

                mov       ax, zzzzzzseg


                                                                         Page 1275
Chapter 24

                           mov        es, ax
                           mov        cx, 100h
                           meminit2

                           print
                           byte       “ Standard Game Device Interface driver”,cr,lf
                           byte       “ PC Compatible Game Adapter Cards”,cr,lf
                           byte       “ Written by Randall Hyde”,cr,lf
                           byte       cr,lf
                           byte       cr,lf
                           byte       “‘SGDI REMOVE’ removes the driver from memory”,cr,lf
                           byte       lf
                           byte       0

                           mov        ax, 1
                           argv                          ;If no parameters, empty str.
                           stricmpl
                           byte       “REMOVE”,0
                           jne        NoRmv

                           mov        dh, 81h            ;Remove opcode.
                           mov        ax, 84ffh
                           int        15h                ;See if we’re already loaded.
                           test       ax, ax             ;Get a zero back?
                           jz         Installed
                           print
                           byte       “SGDI driver is not present in memory, REMOVE “
                           byte       “command ignored.”,cr,lf,0
                           mov        ax, 4c01h;Exit to DOS.
                           int        21h

             Installed:    mov        ax, 8400h
                           mov        dh, 80h            ;Remove call
                           int        15h
                           mov        ax, 8400h
                           mov        dh, 81h            ;TestPresence call
                           int        15h
                           cmp        ax, 0
                           je         NotRemoved
                           print
                           byte       “Successfully removed SGDI driver from memory.”
                           byte       cr,lf,0
                           mov        ax, 4c01h         ;Exit to DOS.
                           int        21h

             NotRemoved:   print
                           byte       “SGDI driver is still present in memory.”,cr,lf,0
                           mov        ax, 4c01h         ;Exit to DOS.
                           int        21h




             ; Okay, Patch INT 15 and go TSR at this point.

             NoRmv:
                           mov        ax, 3515h
                           int        21h
                           mov        wp Int15Vect, bx
                           mov        wp Int15Vect+2, es

                           mov        dx,   cseg
                           mov        ds,   dx
                           mov        dx,   offset MyInt15
                           mov        ax,   2515h
                           int        21h

                           mov        dx,   cseg
                           mov        ds,   dx
                           mov        dx,   seg Initialize
                           sub        dx,   ds:psp
                           add        dx,   2
                           mov        ax,   3100h         ;Do TSR


Page 1276
                                                                                     The Game Adapter

                   int           21h
Main               endp

Initialize         ends


sseg               segment       para stack ‘stack’
                   word          128 dup (0)
endstk             word          ?
sseg               ends


zzzzzzseg          segment       para public ‘zzzzzzseg’
                   byte          16 dup (0)
zzzzzzseg          ends
                   end           Main




     The following program makes several different types of calls to an SGDI driver. You can use this code
to test out an SGDI TSR:
                   .xlist
                   include    stdlib.a
                   includelib stdlib.lib
                   .list


cseg               segment       para public ‘code’
                   assume        cs:cseg, ds:nothing

MinVal0            word          ?
MinVal1            word          ?
MaxVal0            word          ?
MaxVal1            word          ?


; Wait4Button- Waits until the user presses and releases a button.

Wait4Button        proc          near
                   push          ax
                   push          dx
                   push          cx

W4BLp:             mov           ah, 84h
                   mov           dx, 900h           ;Read the L.O. 16 buttons.
                   int           15h
                   cmp           ax, 0              ;Any button down? If not,
                   je            W4BLp              ; loop until this is so.

                   xor           cx, cx             ;Debouncing delay loop.
Delay:             loop          Delay

W4nBLp:            mov           ah, 84h            ;Now wait until the user releases
                   mov           dx, 900h           ; all buttons
                   int           15h
                   cmp           ax, 0
                   jne           W4nBLp

Delay2:            loop          Delay2

                   pop           cx
                   pop           dx
                   pop           ax
                   ret
Wait4Button        endp

Main               proc

                   print
                   byte          “SGDI Test Program.”,cr,lf


                                                                                              Page 1277
Chapter 24

                           byte       “Written by Randall Hyde”,cr,lf,lf
                           byte       “Press any key to continue”,cr,lf,0

                           getc

                           mov        ah, 84h
                           mov        dh, 4            ;Test presence call.
                           int        15h
                           cmp        ax, 0            ;See if there
                           je         MainLoop0
                           print
                           byte       “No SGDI driver present in memory.”,cr,lf,0
                           jmp        Quit

             MainLoop0:print
                           byte       “BIOS: “,0

             ; Okay, read the switches and raw pot values using the BIOS compatible calls.

                           mov        ah, 84h
                           mov        dx, 0            ;BIOS compat. read switches.
                           int        15h
                           puth                        ;Output switch values.
                           mov        al, ‘ ‘
                           putc

                           mov        ah, 84h           ;BIOS compat. read pots.
                           mov        dx, 1
                           int        15h
                           putw
                           mov        al, ‘ ‘
                           putc
                           mov        ax, bx
                           putw
                           mov        al, ‘ ‘
                           putc
                           mov        ax, cx
                           putw
                           mov        al, ‘ ‘
                           putc
                           mov        ax, dx
                           putw

                           putcr
                           mov        ah, 1            ;Repeat until key press.
                           int        16h
                           je         MainLoop0
                           getc


             ; Read the minimum and maximum values for each pot from the user so we
             ; can calibrate the pots.

                           print
                           byte       cr,lf,lf,lf
                           byte       “Move joystick to upper left corner and press “
                           byte       “any button.”,cr,lf,0

                           call       Wait4Button
                           mov        ah, 84h
                           mov        dx, 1            ;Read Raw Values
                           int        15h
                           mov        MinVal0, ax
                           mov        MinVal1, bx

                           print
                           byte       cr,lf
                           byte       “Move the joystick to the lower right corner “
                           byte       “and press any button”,cr,lf,0

                           call       Wait4Button
                           mov        ah, 84h
                           mov        dx, 1            ;Read Raw Values
                           int        15h


Page 1278
                                                                  The Game Adapter

              mov        MaxVal0, ax
              mov        MaxVal1, bx

; Calibrate the pots.

              mov        ax,   MinVal0;Will be eight bits or less.
              mov        bx,   MaxVal0
              mov        cx,   bx            ;Compute centered value as the
              add        cx,   ax            ; average of these two (this is
              shr        cx,   1             ; dangerous, but usually works!)
              mov        ah,   84h
              mov        dx,   300h;Calibrate pot 0
              int        15h

              mov        ax,   MinVal1;Will be eight bits or less.
              mov        bx,   MaxVal1
              mov        cx,   bx            ;Compute centered value as the
              add        cx,   ax            ; average of these two (this is
              shr        cx,   1             ; dangerous, but usually works!)
              mov        ah,   84h
              mov        dx,   301h          ;Calibrate pot 1
              int        15h

MainLoop1:    print
              byte       “ReadSw: “,0

; Okay, read the switches and raw pot values using the BIOS compatible calls.

              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 800h           ;Read switch zero.
              int        15h
              or         al, ‘0’
              putc

              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 801h           ;Read switch one.
              int        15h
              or         al, ‘0’
              putc

              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 802h           ;Read switch two.
              int        15h
              or         al, ‘0’
              putc

              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 803h           ;Read switch three.
              int        15h
              or         al, ‘0’
              putc

              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 804h           ;Read switch four
              int        15h
              or         al, ‘0’
              putc

              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 805h           ;Read switch five.
              int        15h
              or         al, ‘0’
              putc

              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 806h           ;Read switch six.
              int        15h
              or         al, ‘0’
              putc

              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 807h           ;Read switch seven.
              int        15h                ;We won’t bother with
              or         al, ‘0’            ; any more switches.


                                                                         Page 1279
Chapter 24

                                 putc
                                 mov            al, ‘ ‘
                                 putc

                                 mov            ah, 84h
                                 mov            dh, 9                    ;Read all 16 switches.
                                 int            15h
                                 putw

                                 print
                                 byte           “ Pots: “,0
                                 mov            ax, 8403h                ;Read joystick pots.
                                 mov            dx, 200h                 ;Read four pots.
                                 int            15h
                                 puth
                                 mov            al, ‘ ‘
                                 putc
                                 mov            al, ah
                                 puth
                                 mov            al, ‘ ‘
                                 putc

                                 mov            ah, 84h
                                 mov            dx, 503h                 ;Raw read, pot 3.
                                 int            15h
                                 putw

                                 putcr
                                 mov            ah, 1                    ;Repeat until key press.
                                 int            16h
                                 je             MainLoop1
                                 getc




              Quit:              ExitPgm                                 ;DOS macro to quit program.
              Main               endp

              cseg               ends

              sseg               segment        para stack ‘stack’
              stk                byte           1024 dup (“stack “)
              sseg               ends

              zzzzzzseg          segment         para public ‘zzzzzz’
              LastBytes          byte            16 dup (?)
              zzzzzzseg          ends
                                 end            Main




24.6    An SGDI Driver for the CH Products’ Flight Stick Pro
                  The CH Product’s FlightStick Pro joystick is a good example of a specialized product for which the
              SGDI driver is a perfect solution. The FlightStick Pro provides three pots and five switches, the fifth switch
              being a special five-position cooley switch. Although the pots on the FlightStick Pro map to three of the
              analog inputs on the standard game adapter card (pots zero, one, and three), there are insufficient digital
              inputs to handle the eight inputs necessary for the FlightStick Pro’s four buttons and cooley switch.
                   The FlightStick Pro (FSP) uses some electronic circuitry to map these eight switch positions to four
              input bits. To do so, they place one restriction on the use of the FSP switches – you can only press one of
              them at a time. If you hold down two or more switches at the same time, the FSP hardware selects one of
              the switches and reports that value; it ignores the other switches until you release the button. Since only
              one switch can be read at a time, the FSP hardware generates a four bit value that determines the current
              state of the switches. It returns these four bits as the switch values on the standard game adapter card. The
              following table lists the values for each of the switches:


Page 1280
                                                                                           The Game Adapter



                             Table 88: FlightStick Pro Switch Return Values
                 Value (binary)       Priority       Switch Position
                      0000            Highest        Up position on the cooley switch.
                      0100               7           Right position on the cooley switch.
                      1000               6           Down position on the cooley switch.
                      1100               5           Left position on the cooley switch.
                      1110               4           Trigger on the joystick.
                      1101               3           Leftmost button on the joystick.
                      1011               2           Rightmost button on the joystick.
                      0111            Lowest         Middle button on the joystick.
                      1111                           No buttons currently down.

Note that the buttons look just like a single button press. The cooley switch positions contain a position
value in bits six and seven; bits four and five always contain zero when the cooley switch is active.
     The SGDI driver for the FlightStick Pro is very similar to the standard game adapter card SGDI driver.
Since the FlightStick Pro only provides three pots, this code doesn’t bother trying to read pot 2 (which is
non-existent). Of course, the switches on the FlightStick Pro are quite a bit different than those on standard
joysticks, so the FSP SGDI driver maps the FPS switches to eight of the SGDI logical switches. By reading
switches zero through seven, you can test the following conditions on the FSP:


          Table 89: Flight Stick Pro SGDI Switch Mapping
           This SGDI Switch number:          Maps to this FSP Switch:
                        0                    Trigger on joystick.
                        1                    Left button on joystick.
                        2                    Middle button on joystick.
                        3                    Right button on joystick.
                        4                    Cooley up position.
                        5                    Cooley left position.
                        6                    Cooley right position.
                        7                    Cooley down position.

      The FSP SGDI driver contains one other novel feature, it will allow the user to swap the functions of
the left and right switches on the joystick. Many games often assign important functions to the trigger and
left button since they are easiest to press (right handed players can easily press the left button with their
thumb). By typing “LEFT” on the command line, the FSP SGDI driver will swap the functions of the left
and right buttons so left handed players can easily activate this function with their thumb as well.
    The following code provides the complete listing for the FSPSGDI driver. Note that you can use the
same test program from the previous section to test this driver.
                   .286
                   page           58, 132
                   name           FSPSGDI
                   title          FSPSGDI (CH Products Standard Game Device Interface).

; FSPSGDI.EXE


                                                                                                  Page 1281
Chapter 24

             ;
             ;        Usage:
             ;              FSPSDGI   {LEFT}
             ;
             ; This program loads a TSR which patches INT 15 so arbitrary game programs
             ; can read the CH Products FlightStick Pro joystick in a portable fashion.


             wp            equ        <word ptr>
             byp           equ        <byte ptr>



             ; We need to load cseg in memory before any other segments!

             cseg          segment    para public ‘code’
             cseg          ends


             ; Initialization code, which we do not need except upon initial load,
             ; goes in the following segment:

             Initialize    segment    para public ‘INIT’
             Initialize    ends

             ; UCR Standard Library routines which get dumped later on.

                           .xlist
                           include        stdlib.a
                           includelib stdlib.lib
                           .list

             sseg          segment    para stack ‘stack’
             sseg          ends

             zzzzzzseg     segment    para public ‘zzzzzzseg’
             zzzzzzseg     ends



             CSEG          segment    para public ‘CODE’
                           assume     cs:cseg, ds:nothing

             Int15Vect     dword      0

             PSP           word       ?

             ; Port addresses for a typical joystick card:

             JoyPort       equ        201h
             JoyTrigger    equ        201h


             CurrentReading word      0

             Pot           struc
             PotMask       byte       0                 ;Pot mask for hardware.
             DidCal        byte       0                 ;Is this pot calibrated?
             min           word       5000              ;Minimum pot value
             max           word       0                 ;Max pot value
             center        word       0                 ;Pot value in the middle
             Pot           ends

             Pot0          Pot        <1>
             Pot1          Pot        <2>
             Pot3          Pot        <8>


             ; SwapButtons- 0 if we should use normal flightstick pro buttons,
             ;              1 if we should swap the left and right buttons.

             SwapButtons   byte       0

             ; SwBits- the four bit input value from the Flightstick Pro selects one


Page 1282
                                                                The Game Adapter

;          of the following bit patterns for a given switch position.

SwBits         byte       10h             ;Sw4
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       40h             ;Sw6
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       4               ;Sw 2

               byte       80h             ;Sw   7
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       8               ;Sw   3
               byte       20h             ;Sw   5
               byte       2               ;Sw   1
               byte       1               ;Sw   0
               byte       0               ;NA

SwBitsL        byte       10h             ;Sw4
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       40h             ;Sw6
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       4               ;Sw 2

               byte       80h             ;Sw   7
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       0               ;NA
               byte       2               ;Sw   3
               byte       20h             ;Sw   5
               byte       8               ;Sw   1
               byte       1               ;Sw   0
               byte       0               ;NA



; The IDstring address gets passed back to the caller on a testpresence
; call. The four bytes before the IDstring must contain the serial number
; and current driver number.

SerialNumber   byte       0,0,0
IDNumber       byte       0
IDString       byte       “CH Products:Flightstick Pro”,0
               byte       “Written by Randall Hyde”,0


;============================================================================
;
; ReadPots-    AH contains a bit mask to determine which pots we should read.
;              Bit 0 is one if we should read pot 0, bit 1 is one if we should
;              read pot 1, bit 3 is one if we should read pot 3. All other bits
;              will be zero.
;
;        This code returns the pot values in SI, BX, BP, and DI for Pot 0, 1,
;        2, & 3.
;

ReadPots       proc       near
               sub        bp, bp
               mov        si, bp
               mov        di, bp
               mov        bx, bp

; Wait for pots to finish any past junk:

               mov        dx,   JoyPort
               out        dx,   al              ;Trigger pots
               mov        cx,   400h
Wait4Pots:     in         al,   dx
               and        al,   0Fh


                                                                        Page 1283
Chapter 24

                            loopnz    Wait4Pots

             ; Okay, read the pots:

                            mov       dx, JoyTrigger
                            out       dx, al             ;Trigger pots
                            mov       dx, JoyPort
                            mov       cx, 8000h          ;Don’t let this go on forever.
             PotReadLoop:   in        al, dx
                            and       al, ah
                            jz        PotReadDone
                            shr       al, 1
                            adc       si, 0
                            shr       al, 1
                            adc       bp, 0
                            shr       al, 2
                            adc       di, 0
                            loop      PotReadLoop
             PotReadDone:
                            ret
             ReadPots       endp

             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ;
             ; Normalize- BX contains a pointer to a pot structure, AX contains
             ;             a pot value. Normalize that value according to the
             ;             calibrated pot.
             ;
             ; Note: DS must point at cseg before calling this routine.


                            assume    ds:cseg
             Normalize      proc      near
                            push      cx

             ; Sanity check to make sure the calibration process went okay.

                            cmp       [bx].Pot.DidCal, 0
                            je        BadNorm
                            mov       dx, [bx].Pot.Center
                            cmp       dx, [bx].Pot.Min
                            jbe       BadNorm
                            cmp       dx, [bx].Pot.Max
                            jae       BadNorm

             ; Clip the value if it is out of range.

                            cmp       ax, [bx].Pot.Min
                            ja        MinOkay
                            mov       ax, [bx].Pot.Min
             MinOkay:

                            cmp       ax, [bx].Pot.Max
                            jb        MaxOkay
                            mov       ax, [bx].Pot.Max
             MaxOkay:

             ; Scale this guy around the center:

                            cmp       ax, [bx].Pot.Center
                            jb        Lower128

             ; Scale in the range 128..255 here:

                            sub       ax, [bx].Pot.Center
                            mov       dl, ah            ;Multiply by 128
                            mov       ah, al
                            mov       dh, 0
                            mov       al, dh
                            shr       dl, 1
                            rcr       ax, 1
                            mov       cx, [bx].Pot.Max
                            sub       cx, [bx].Pot.Center
                            jz        BadNorm           ;Prevent division by zero.


Page 1284
                                                                 The Game Adapter

              div        cx                ;Compute normalized value.
              add        ax, 128           ;Scale to range 128..255.
              cmp        ah, 0
              je         NormDone
              mov        ax, 0ffh          ;Result must fit in 8 bits!
              jmp        NormDone

; Scale in the range 0..127 here:

Lower128:     sub        ax, [bx].Pot.Min
              mov        dl, ah            ;Multiply by 128
              mov        ah, al
              mov        dh, 0
              mov        al, dh
              shr        dl, 1
              rcr        ax, 1
              mov        cx, [bx].Pot.Center
              sub        cx, [bx].Pot.Min
              jz         BadNorm
              div        cx                ;Compute normalized value.
              cmp        ah, 0
              je         NormDone
              mov        ax, 0ffh          ;Result must fit in 8 bits!
              jmp        NormDone

BadNorm:      sub        ax, ax
NormDone:     pop        cx
              ret
Normalize     endp
              assume     ds:nothing

;============================================================================
; INT 15h handler functions.
;============================================================================
;
; Although these are defined as near procs, they are not really procedures.
; The MyInt15 code jumps to each of these with BX, a far return address, and
; the flags sitting on the stack. Each of these routines must handle the
; stack appropriately.
;
;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
; BIOS- Handles the two BIOS calls, DL=0 to read the switches, DL=1 to
;        read the pots. For the BIOS routines, we’ll ignore the cooley
;        switch (the hat) and simply read the other four switches.

BIOS          proc       near
              cmp        dl, 1             ;See if switch or pot routine.
              jb         Read4Sw
              je         ReadBIOSPots
              pop        bx
              jmp        cs:Int15Vect      ;Let someone else handle it!

Read4Sw:      push       dx
              mov        dx, JoyPort
              in         al, dx
              shr        al, 4
              mov        bl, al
              mov        bh, 0
              cmp        cs:SwapButtons, 0
              je         DoLeft2
              mov        al, cs:SwBitsL[bx]
              jmp        SBDone

DoLeft2:      mov        al, cs:SwBits[bx]
SBDone:       rol        al, 4         ;Put Sw0..3 in upper bits and make
              not        al            ; 0=switch down, just like game card.
              pop        dx
              pop        bx
              iret

ReadBIOSPots: pop        bx             ;Return a value in BX!
              push       si
              push       di
              push       bp


                                                                         Page 1285
Chapter 24

                           mov        ah, 0bh
                           call       ReadPots
                           mov        ax, si
                           mov        bx, bp
                           mov        dx, di
                           sub        cx, cx
                           pop        bp
                           pop        di
                           pop        si
                           iret
             BIOS          endp


             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ;
             ; ReadPot-    On entry, DL contains a pot number to read.
             ;             Read and normalize that pot and return the result in AL.

                           assume     ds:cseg
             ReadPot       proc       near
             ;;;;;;;;;;    push       bx                 ;Already on stack.
                           push       ds
                           push       cx
                           push       dx
                           push       si
                           push       di
                           push       bp

                           mov        bx, cseg
                           mov        ds, bx

                           cmp        dl, 0
                           jne        Try1
                           mov        ah, Pot0.PotMask
                           call       ReadPots
                           lea        bx, Pot0
                           mov        ax, si
                           call       Normalize
                           jmp        GotPot

             Try1:         cmp        dl, 1
                           jne        Try3
                           mov        ah, Pot1.PotMask
                           call       ReadPots
                           lea        bx, Pot1
                           mov        ax, bp
                           call       Normalize
                           jmp        GotPot

             Try3:         cmp        dl, 3
                           jne        BadPot
                           mov        ah, Pot3.PotMask
                           call       ReadPots
                           lea        bx, Pot3
                           mov        ax, di
                           call       Normalize
                           jmp        GotPot

             BadPot:       sub        ax, ax             ;Question: Should we pass this on
                                                         ; or just return zero?
             GotPot:       pop        bp
                           pop        di
                           pop        si
                           pop        dx
                           pop        cx
                           pop        ds
                           pop        bx
                           iret
             ReadPot       endp
                           assume     ds:nothing


             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ;


Page 1286
                                                                 The Game Adapter

; ReadRaw-    On entry, DL contains a pot number to read.
;             Read that pot and return the unnormalized result in AL.

              assume     ds:cseg
ReadRaw       proc       near
;;;;;;;;;;    push       bx                 ;Already on stack.
              push       ds
              push       cx
              push       dx
              push       si
              push       di
              push       bp

              mov        bx, cseg
              mov        ds, bx

              cmp        dl, 0
              jne        Try1
              mov        ah, Pot0.PotMask
              call       ReadPots
              mov        ax, si
              jmp        GotPot

Try1:         cmp        dl, 1
              jne        Try3
              mov        ah, Pot1.PotMask
              call       ReadPots
              mov        ax, bp
              jmp        GotPot

Try3:         cmp        dl, 3
              jne        BadPot
              mov        ah, Pot3.PotMask
              call       ReadPots
              mov        ax, di
              jmp        GotPot

BadPot:       sub        ax, ax             ;Just return zero.
GotPot:       pop        bp
              pop        di
              pop        si
              pop        dx
              pop        cx
              pop        ds
              pop        bx
              iret
ReadRaw       endp
              assume     ds:nothing


;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
; Read4Pots-Reads pots zero, one, two, and three returning their
;             values in AL, AH, DL, and DH. Since the flightstick
;             Pro doesn’t have a pot 2 installed, return zero for
;             that guy.

Read4Pots     proc       near
;;;;;;;;;;;   push       bx                 ;Already on stack
              push       ds
              push       cx
              push       si
              push       di
              push       bp

              mov        dx, cseg
              mov        ds, dx

              mov        ah, 0bh            ;Read pots 0, 1, and 3.
              call       ReadPots

              mov        ax, si
              lea        bx, Pot0
              call       Normalize
              mov        cl, al


                                                                        Page 1287
Chapter 24


                           mov        ax, bp
                           lea        bx, Pot1
                           call       Normalize
                           mov        ch, al

                           mov        ax, di
                           lea        bx, Pot3
                           call       Normalize
                           mov        dh, al            ;Pot 3 value.
                           mov        ax, cx            ;Pots 0 and 1.
                           mov        dl, 0             ;Pot 2 is non-existant.

                           pop        bp
                           pop        di
                           pop        si
                           pop        cx
                           pop        ds
                           pop        bx
                           iret
             Read4Pots     endp




             ;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             ; CalPot-     Calibrate the pot specified by DL. On entry, AL contains
             ;             the minimum pot value (it better be less than 256!), BX
             ;             contains the maximum pot value, and CX contains the centered
             ;             pot value.

                           assume     ds:cseg
             CalPot        proc       near
                           pop        bx                ;Retrieve maximum value
                           push       ds
                           push       si
                           mov        si, cseg
                           mov        ds, si

             ; Sanity check on parameters, sort them in ascending order:

                           mov        ah, 0
                           cmp        bx, cx
                           ja         GoodMax
                           xchg       bx, cx
             GoodMax:      cmp        ax, cx
                           jb         GoodMin
                           xchg       ax, cx
             GoodMin:      cmp        cx, bx
                           jb         GoodCenter
                           xchg       cx, bx
             GoodCenter:


             ; Okay, figure out who were supposed to calibrate:

                           lea        si, Pot0
                           cmp        dl, 1
                           jb         DoCal
                           lea        si, Pot1
                           je         DoCal
                           cmp        dl, 3
                           jne        CalDone
                           lea        si, Pot3

             DoCal:        mov        [si].Pot.min, ax
                           mov        [si].Pot.max, bx
                           mov        [si].Pot.center, cx
                           mov        [si].Pot.DidCal, 1
             CalDone:      pop        si
                           pop        ds
                           iret
             CalPot        endp
                           assume     ds:nothing


Page 1288
                                                               The Game Adapter



;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
; TestCal-    Just checks to see if the pot specified by DL has already
;             been calibrated.

              assume     ds:cseg
TestCal       proc       near
;;;;;;;;      push       bx                ;Already on stack
              push       ds
              mov        bx, cseg
              mov        ds, bx

              sub        ax, ax            ;Assume no calibration
              lea        bx, Pot0
              cmp        dl, 1
              jb         GetCal
              lea        bx, Pot1
              je         GetCal
              cmp        dl, 3
              jne        BadCal
              lea        bx, Pot3

GetCal:       mov        al, [bx].Pot.DidCal
              mov        ah, 0
BadCal:       pop        ds
              pop        bx
              iret
TestCal       endp
              assume     ds:nothing


;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
;
; ReadSw-     Reads the switch whose switch number appears in DL.

SwTable       byte       11100000b, 11010000b, 01110000b, 10110000b
              byte       00000000b, 11000000b, 01000000b, 10000000b

SwTableL      byte       11100000b, 10110000b, 01110000b, 11010000b
              byte       00000000b, 11000000b, 01000000b, 10000000b

ReadSw        proc       near
;;;;;;;       push       bx                ;Already on stack
              mov        bl, dl            ;Save switch to read.
              mov        bh, 0
              mov        dx, JoyPort
              in         al, dx
              and        al, 0f0h
              cmp        cs:SwapButtons, 0
              je         DoLeft0
              cmp        al, cs:SwTableL[bx]
              jne        NotDown
              jmp        IsDown

DoLeft0:      cmp        al, cs:SwTable[bx]
              jne        NotDown

IsDown:       mov        ax, 1
              pop        bx
              iret

NotDown:      sub        ax, ax
              pop        bx
              iret
ReadSw        endp


;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
;
; Read16Sw-   Reads all eight switches and returns their values in AX.

Read16Sw      proc       near
;;;;;;;;      push       bx                ;Already on stack


                                                                      Page 1289
Chapter 24

                             mov      ah, 0             ;Switches 8-15 are non-existant.
                             mov      dx, JoyPort
                             in       al, dx
                             shr      al, 4
                             mov      bl, al
                             mov      bh, 0
                             cmp      cs:SwapButtons, 0
                             je       DoLeft1
                             mov      al, cs:SwBitsL[bx]
                             jmp      R8Done

             DoLeft1:        mov      al, cs:SwBits[bx]
             R8Done:         pop      bx
                             iret
             Read16Sw        endp


             ;****************************************************************************
             ;
             ; MyInt15-    Patch for the BIOS INT 15 routine to control reading the
             ;             joystick.

             MyInt15         proc     far
                             push     bx
                             cmp      ah, 84h             ;Joystick code?
                             je       DoJoystick
             OtherInt15:     pop      bx
                             jmp      cs:Int15Vect

             DoJoystick:     mov      bh, 0
                             mov      bl, dh
                             cmp      bl, 80h
                             jae      VendorCalls
                             cmp      bx, JmpSize
                             jae      OtherInt15
                             shl      bx, 1
                             jmp      wp cs:jmptable[bx]

             jmptable        word     BIOS
                             word     ReadPot, Read4Pots, CalPot, TestCal
                             word     ReadRaw, OtherInt15, OtherInt15
                             word     ReadSw, Read16Sw
             JmpSize         =        ($-jmptable)/2


             ; Handle vendor specific calls here.

             VendorCalls:    je       RemoveDriver
                             cmp      bl, 81h
                             je       TestPresence
                             pop      bx
                             jmp      cs:Int15Vect

             ; TestPresence- Returns zero in AX and a pointer to the ID string in ES:BX

             TestPresence: pop        bx                  ;Get old value off stack.
                           sub        ax,   ax
                           mov        bx,   cseg
                           mov        es,   bx
                           lea        bx,   IDString
                           iret

             ; RemoveDriver-If there are no other drivers loaded after this one in
             ;              memory, disconnect it and remove it from memory.

             RemoveDriver:
                             push     ds
                             push     es
                             push     ax
                             push     dx

                             mov      dx, cseg
                             mov      ds, dx



Page 1290
                                                                  The Game Adapter

; See if we’re the last routine patched into INT 15h

              mov        ax, 3515h
              int        21h
              cmp        bx, offset MyInt15
              jne        CantRemove
              mov        bx, es
              cmp        bx, wp seg MyInt15
              jne        CantRemove

              mov        ax,   PSP        ;Free the memory we’re in
              mov        es,   ax
              push       es
              mov        ax,   es:[2ch]    ;First, free env block.
              mov        es,   ax
              mov        ah,   49h
              int        21h
;
              pop        es               ;Now free program space.
              mov        ah, 49h
              int        21h

              lds        dx, Int15Vect     ;Restore previous int vect.
              mov        ax, 2515h
              int        21h

CantRemove:   pop        dx
              pop        ax
              pop        es
              pop        ds
              pop        bx
              iret
MyInt15       endp
cseg          ends



; The following segment is tossed when this code goes resident.

Initialize    segment    para public ‘INIT’
              assume     cs:Initialize, ds:cseg
Main          proc
              mov        ax, cseg         ;Get ptr to vars segment
              mov        es, ax
              mov        es:PSP, ds        ;Save PSP value away
              mov        ds, ax

              mov        ax, zzzzzzseg
              mov        es, ax
              mov        cx, 100h
              meminit2

              print
              byte       “Standard Game Device Interface driver”,cr,lf
              byte       “CH Products Flightstick Pro”,cr,lf
              byte       “Written by Randall Hyde”,cr,lf
              byte       cr,lf
              byte       “‘FSPSGDI LEFT’ swaps the left and right buttons for “
              byte       “left handed players”,cr,lf
              byte       “‘FSPSGDI REMOVE’ removes the driver from memory”
              byte       cr, lf, lf
              byte       0

              mov        ax, 1
              argv                        ;If no parameters, empty str.
              stricmpl
              byte       “LEFT”,0
              jne        NoLEFT
              mov        SwapButtons, 1
              print
              byte       “Left and right buttons swapped”,cr,lf,0
              jmp        SwappedLeft

NoLEFT:       stricmpl


                                                                         Page 1291
Chapter 24

                            byte      “REMOVE”,0
                            jne       NoRmv
                            mov       dh, 81h
                            mov       ax, 84ffh
                            int       15h             ;See if we’re already loaded.
                            test      ax, ax          ;Get a zero back?
                            jz        Installed
                            print
                            byte      “SGDI driver is not present in memory, REMOVE “
                            byte      “command ignored.”,cr,lf,0
                            mov       ax, 4c01h;Exit to DOS.
                            int       21h

             Installed:     mov       ax, 8400h
                            mov       dh, 80h            ;Remove call
                            int       15h
                            mov       ax, 8400h
                            mov       dh, 81h            ;TestPresence call
                            int       15h
                            cmp       ax, 0
                            je        NotRemoved
                            print
                            byte      “Successfully removed SGDI driver from memory.”
                            byte      cr,lf,0
                            mov       ax, 4c01h     ;Exit to DOS.
                            int       21h

             NotRemoved:    print
                            byte      “SGDI driver is still present in memory.”,cr,lf,0
                            mov       ax, 4c01h;Exit to DOS.
                            int       21h



             NoRmv:


             ; Okay, Patch INT 15 and go TSR at this point.

             SwappedLeft:   mov       ax, 3515h
                            int       21h
                            mov       wp Int15Vect, bx
                            mov       wp Int15Vect+2, es

                            mov       dx,   cseg
                            mov       ds,   dx
                            mov       dx,   offset MyInt15
                            mov       ax,   2515h
                            int       21h

                            mov       dx,   cseg
                            mov       ds,   dx
                            mov       dx,   seg Initialize
                            sub       dx,   ds:psp
                            add       dx,   2
                            mov       ax,   3100h         ;Do TSR
                            int       21h
             Main           endp

             Initialize     ends

             sseg           segment   para stack ‘stack’
                            word      128 dup (0)
             endstk         word      ?
             sseg           ends

             zzzzzzseg      segment   para public ‘zzzzzzseg’
                            byte      16 dup (0)
             zzzzzzseg      ends
                            end       Main




Page 1292
                                                                                                               The Game Adapter


24.7     Patching Existing Games
                           Maybe you’re not quite ready to write the next million dollar game. Perhaps you’d like to get a little
                     more enjoyment out of the games you already own. Well, this section will provide a practical application
                     of a semiresident program that patches the Lucas Arts’ XWing (Star Wars simulation) game. This program
                     patches the XWing game to take advantage of the special features found on the CH Products’ FlightStick
                     Pro. In particular, it lets you use the throttle pot on the FSP to control the speed of the spacecraft. It also
                     lets you program each of the buttons with up to four strings of eight characters each.
                          To describe how you can patch an existing game, a short description of how this patch was devel-
                     oped is in order. The FSPXW patch was developed by using the Soft-ICEdebugging tool. This program
                     lets you set a breakpoint whenever an 80386 or later processor accesses a specific I/O port8. Setting a
                     breakpoint at I/O address 201h while running the xwing.exe file stopped the XWing program when it
                     decided to read the analog and switch inputs. Disassembly of the surrounding code produced complete
                     joystick and button read routines. After locating these routines, it was easy enough to write a program to
                     search through memory for the code and patch in jumps to code in the FSPXW patch program.
                          Note that the original joystick code inside XWing works perfectly fine with the FPS. The only reason
                     for patching into the joystick code is so our code can read the throttle every how and then and take appro-
                     priate action.
                          The button routines were another story altogether. The FSPXW patch needs to take control of
                     XWing’s button routines because the user of FSPXW might want to redefine a button recognized by XWing
                     for some other purpose. Therefore, whenever XWing calls its button routine, control transfers to the but-
                     ton routine inside FSPXW that decides whether to pass real button information back to XWing or to fake
                     buttons in the up position because those buttons are redefined to other functions. By default (unless you
                     change the source code, the buttons have the following programming:




                                    Rotate Ship                                                        Hide/Show Cockpit




                                                                                   Weapons
                                                                                    Select

                           The programming of the cooley switch demonstrates an interesting feature of the FSPXW patch: you
                     can program up to four different strings on each button. The first time you press a button, FSPXW emits
                     the first string, the second time you press a button it emits the second string, then the third, and finally the
                     fourth. If the string is empty, the FSPXW string skips it. The FSPXW patch uses the cooley switch to select
                     the cockpit views. Pressing the cooley switch forward displays the forward view. Pulling the cooley switch
                     backwards presents the rear view. However, the XWing game provides three left and right views. Pushing
                     the cooley switch to the left or right once displays the 45 degree view. Pressing it a second time presents


   8. This feature is not specific to Soft-ICE, many 80386 debuggers will let you do this.

                                                                                                                         Page 1293
Chapter 24

               the 90 degree view. Pressing it to the left or right a third time provides the 135 degree view. The following
               diagram shows the default programming on the cooley switch:
                                                             Forward
                                                              View

                     315°
                                                                                                    45°

       Left                                                                                                       Right
       Views    270°                                                                                              Views
                                                                                                        90°



                     225°
                                                                                                    135°




                                                               Back
                                                               View

                     One word of caution concerning this patch: it only works with the basic XWing game. It does not
               support the add-on modules (Imperial Pursuit, B-Wing, Tie Fighter, etc.). Furthermore, this patch assumes
               that the basic XWing code has not changed over the years. It could be that a recent release of the XWing
               game uses new joystick routines and the code associated with this application will not be able to locate or
               patch those new routines. This patch will detect such a situation and will not patch XWing if this is the
               case. You must have sufficient free RAM for this patch, XWing, and anything else you have loaded into
               memory at the same time (the exact amount of RAM XWing needs depends upon the features you’ve
               installed, a fully installed system requires slightly more than 610K free).
                     Without further ado, here’s the FSPXW code:


                                  .286
                                  page           58, 132
                                  name           FSPXW
                                  title          FSPXW (Flightstick Pro driver for XWING).
                                  subttl         Copyright (C) 1994 Randall Hyde.


               ; FSPXW.EXE
               ;
               ;        Usage:
               ;              FSPXW
               ;
               ; This program executes the XWING.EXE program and patches it to use the
               ; Flightstick Pro.


               byp                textequ        <byte ptr>
               wp                 textequ        <word ptr>


               cseg               segment para public ‘CODE’
               cseg               ends

               sseg               segment        para stack ‘STACK’
               sseg               ends

               zzzzzzseg          segment        para public ‘zzzzzzseg’
               zzzzzzseg          ends

Page 1294
                                                                   The Game Adapter


                include        stdlib.a
                includelib stdlib.lib
                matchfuncs

                ifndef     debug
Installation    segment    para public ‘Install’
Installation    ends
                endif

CSEG            segment    para public ‘CODE’
                assume     cs:cseg, ds:nothing

; Timer interrupt vector

Int1CVect       dword      ?


; PSP-     Program Segment Prefix. Needed to free up memory before running
;          the real application program.

PSP             word       0



; Program Loading data structures (for DOS).

ExecStruct      word       0                 ;Use parent’s Environment blk.
                dword      CmdLine           ;For the cmd ln parms.
                dword      DfltFCB
                dword      DfltFCB
LoadSSSP        dword      ?
LoadCSIP        dword      ?
PgmName         dword      Pgm


; Variables for the throttle pot.
; LastThrottle contains the character last sent (so we only send one copy).
; ThrtlCntDn counts the number of times the throttle routine gets called.

LastThrottle    byte       0
ThrtlCntDn      byte       10


; Button Mask- Used to mask out the programmed buttons when the game
; reads the real buttons.

ButtonMask      byte       0f0h


; The following variables allow the user to reprogram the buttons.

KeyRdf          struct
Ptrs            word       ?              ;The PTRx fields point at the
ptr2            word       ?              ; four possible strings of 8 chars
ptr3            word       ?              ; each. Each button press cycles
ptr4            word       ?              ; through these strings.
Index           word       ?              ;Index to next string to output.
Cnt             word       ?
Pgmd            word       ?              ;Flag = 0 if not redefined.
KeyRdf          ends


; Left codes are output if the cooley switch is pressed to the left.
; Note that the strings ares actually zero terminated strings of words.

Left            KeyRdf     <Left1, Left2, Left3, Left4, 0, 6, 1>
Left1           word       ‘7’, 0
Left2           word       ‘4’, 0
Left3           word       ‘1’, 0
Left4           word       0

; Right codes are output if the cooley switch is pressed to the Right.



                                                                          Page 1295
Chapter 24

             Right         KeyRdf       <Right1, Right2, Right3, Right4, 0, 6, 1>
             Right1        word         ‘9’, 0
             Right2        word         ‘6’, 0
             Right3        word         ‘3’, 0
             Right4        word         0

             ; Up codes are output if the cooley switch is pressed Up.

             Up            KeyRdf       <Up1, Up2, Up3, Up4, 0, 2, 1>
             Up1           word         ‘8’, 0
             Up2           word         0
             Up3           word         0
             Up4           word         0

             ; DownKey codes are output if the cooley switch is pressed Down.

             Down          KeyRdf       <Down1, Down2, Down3, Down4, 0, 2, 1>
             Down1         word         ‘2’, 0
             Down2         word         0
             Down3         word         0
             Down4         word         0

             ; Sw0 codes are output if the user pulls the trigger.(This switch is not
             ; redefined.)

             Sw0           KeyRdf       <Sw01, Sw02, Sw03, Sw04, 0, 0, 0>
             Sw01          word         0
             Sw02          word         0
             Sw03          word         0
             Sw04          word         0


             ; Sw1 codes are output if the user presses Sw1 (the left button
             ; if the user hasn’t swapped the left and right buttons). Not Redefined.

             Sw1           KeyRdf       <Sw11, Sw12, Sw13, Sw14, 0, 0, 0>
             Sw11          word         0
             Sw12          word         0
             Sw13          word         0
             Sw14          word         0

             ; Sw2 codes are output if the user presses Sw2 (the middle button).

             Sw2           KeyRdf       <Sw21, Sw22, Sw23, Sw24, 0, 2, 1>
             Sw21          word         ‘w’, 0
             Sw22          word         0
             Sw23          word         0
             Sw24          word         0

             ; Sw3 codes are output if the user presses Sw3 (the right button
             ; if the user hasn’t swapped the left and right buttons).

             Sw3           KeyRdf       <Sw31, Sw32, Sw33, Sw34, 0, 0, 0>
             Sw31          word         0
             Sw32          word         0
             Sw33          word         0
             Sw34          word         0

             ; Switch status buttons:

             CurSw         byte         0
             LastSw        byte         0


             ;****************************************************************************
             ; FSPXW patch begins here. This is the memory resident part. Only put code
             ; which which has to be present at run-time or needs to be resident after
             ; freeing up memory.
             ;****************************************************************************

             Main          proc
                           mov          cs:PSP, ds
                           mov          ax, cseg      ;Get ptr to vars segment
                           mov          ds, ax


Page 1296
                                                                   The Game Adapter



; Get the current INT 1Ch interrupt vector:

                mov        ax, 351ch
                int        21h
                mov        wp Int1CVect, bx
                mov        wp Int1CVect+2, es

; The following call to MEMINIT assumes no error occurs. If it does,
; we’re hosed anyway.

                mov        ax, zzzzzzseg
                mov        es, ax
                mov        cx, 1024/16
                meminit2


; Do some initialization before running the game. These are calls to the
; initialization code which gets dumped before actually running XWING.

                call       far ptr ChkBIOS15
                call       far ptr Identify
                call       far ptr Calibrate

; If any switches were programmed, remove those switches from the
; ButtonMask:

                mov        al, 0f0h            ;Assume all buttons are okay.
                cmp        sw0.pgmd, 0
                je         Sw0NotPgmd
                and        al, 0e0h            ;Remove sw0 from contention.
Sw0NotPgmd:

                cmp        sw1.pgmd, 0
                je         Sw1NotPgmd
                and        al, 0d0h            ;Remove Sw1 from contention.
Sw1NotPgmd:

                cmp        sw2.pgmd, 0
                je         Sw2NotPgmd
                and        al, 0b0h            ;Remove Sw2 from contention.
Sw2NotPgmd:

                cmp        sw3.pgmd, 0
                je         Sw3NotPgmd
                and        al, 070h            ;Remove Sw3 from contention.
Sw3NotPgmd:
                mov        ButtonMask, al      ;Save result as button mask

;   Now, free up memory from ZZZZZZSEG on to make room for XWING.
;   Note: Absolutely no calls to UCR Standard Library routines from
;   this point forward! (ExitPgm is okay, it’s just a macro which calls DOS.)
;   Note that after the execution of this code, none of the code & data
;   from zzzzzzseg on is valid.

                mov        bx, zzzzzzseg
                sub        bx, PSP
                inc        bx
                mov        es, PSP
                mov        ah, 4ah
                int        21h
                jnc        GoodRealloc
                print
                byte       “Memory allocation error.”
                byte       cr,lf,0
                jmp        Quit

GoodRealloc:

; Now load the XWING program into memory:

                mov        bx, seg ExecStruct
                mov        es, bx


                                                                             Page 1297
Chapter 24

                           mov        bx, offset ExecStruc ;Ptr to program record.
                           lds        dx, PgmName
                           mov        ax, 4b01h         ;Load, do not exec, pgm
                           int        21h
                           jc         Quit              ;If error loading file.

             ; Search for the joystick code in memory:

                           mov        si, zzzzzzseg
                           mov        ds, si
                           xor        si, si

                           mov        di, cs
                           mov        es, di
                           mov        di, offset JoyStickCode
                           mov        cx, JoyLength
                           call       FindCode
                           jc         Quit              ;If didn’t find joystick code.


             ; Patch the XWING joystick code here

                           mov        byp ds:[si], 09ah                  ;Far call
                           mov        wp ds:[si+1], offset ReadGame
                           mov        wp ds:[si+3], cs

             ; Find the Button code here.

                           mov        si, zzzzzzseg
                           mov        ds, si
                           xor        si, si

                           mov        di, cs
                           mov        es, di
                           mov        di, offset ReadSwCode
                           mov        cx, ButtonLength
                           call       FindCode
                           jc         Quit

             ; Patch the button code here.

                           mov        byp ds:[si], 9ah
                           mov        wp ds:[si+1], offset ReadButtons
                           mov        wp ds:[si+3], cs
                           mov        byp ds:[si+5], 90h               ;NOP.


             ; Patch in our timer interrupt handler:

                           mov        ax,    251ch
                           mov        dx,    seg MyInt1C
                           mov        ds,    dx
                           mov        dx,    offset MyInt1C
                           int        21h


             ; Okay, start the XWING.EXE program running

                           mov        ah, 62h           ;Get PSP
                           int        21h
                           mov        ds, bx
                           mov        es, bx
                           mov        wp ds:[10], offset Quit
                           mov        wp ds:[12], cs
                           mov        ss, wp cseg:LoadSSSP+2
                           mov        sp, wp cseg:LoadSSSP
                           jmp        dword ptr cseg:LoadCSIP


             Quit:         lds        dx, cs:Int1CVect     ;Restore timer vector.
                           mov        ax, 251ch
                           int        21h
                           ExitPgm



Page 1298
                                                                  The Game Adapter

Main          endp

;****************************************************************************
;
; ReadGame-   This routine gets called whenever XWing reads the joystick.
;             On every 10th call it will read the throttle pot and send
;             appropriate characters to the type ahead buffer, if
;             necessary.

              assume     ds:nothing
ReadGame      proc       far
              dec        cs:ThrtlCntDn     ;Only do this each 10th time
              jne        SkipThrottle      ; XWING calls the joystick
              mov        cs:ThrtlCntDn, 10 ; routine.

              push       ax
              push       bx                  ;No need to save bp, dx, or cx as
              push       di                  ; XWING preserves these.

              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 103h            ;Read the throttle pot
              int        15h

; Convert the value returned by the pot routine into the four characters
; 0..63:”\”, 64..127:”[“, 128..191:”]”, 192..255:<bs>, to denote zero, 1/3,
; 2/3, and full power, respectively.

              mov        dl, al
              mov        ax, “\”           ;Zero power
              cmp        dl, 192
              jae        SetPower
              mov        ax, “[“           ;1/3 power.
              cmp        dl, 128
              jae        SetPower
              mov        ax, “]”           ;2/3 power.
              cmp        dl, 64
              jae        SetPower
              mov        ax, 8             ;BS, full power.
SetPower:     cmp        al, cs:LastThrottle
              je         SkipPIB
              mov        cs:LastThrottle, al
              call       PutInBuffer

SkipPIB:      pop        di
              pop        bx
              pop        ax
SkipThrottle: neg        bx               ;XWING returns data in these registers.
              neg        di               ;We patched the NEG and STI instrs
              sti                         ; so do that here.
              ret
ReadGame      endp

              assume     ds:nothing
ReadButtons   proc       far
              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 0
              int        15h
              not        al
              and        al, ButtonMask      ;Turn off pgmd buttons.
              ret
ReadButtons   endp



; MyInt1C- Called every 1/18th second. Reads switches and decides if it
; should shove some characters into the type ahead buffer.

              assume     ds:cseg
MyInt1c       proc       far
              push       ds
              push       ax
              push       bx
              push       dx
              mov        ax, cseg


                                                                         Page 1299
Chapter 24

                           mov        ds, ax

                           mov        al, CurSw
                           mov        LastSw, al

                           mov        dx, 900h           ;Read the 8 switches.
                           mov        ah, 84h
                           int        15h

                           mov        CurSw, al
                           xor        al, LastSw         ;See if any changes
                           jz         NoChanges
                           and        al, CurSw          ;See if sw just went down.
                           jz         NoChanges


             ; If a switch has just gone down, output an appropriate set of scan codes
             ; for it, if that key is active. Note that pressing *any* key will reset
             ; all the other key indexes.

                           test       al, 1              ;See if Sw0 (trigger) was pulled.
                           jz         NoSw0
                           cmp        Sw0.Pgmd, 0
                           je         NoChanges
                           mov        ax, 0
                           mov        Left.Index, ax     ;Reset the key indexes for all keys
                           mov        Right.Index, ax    ; except SW0.
                           mov        Up.Index, ax
                           mov        Down.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw1.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw2.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw3.Index, ax
                           mov        bx, Sw0.Index
                           mov        ax, Sw0.Index
                           mov        bx, Sw0.Ptrs[bx]
                           add        ax, 2
                           cmp        ax, Sw0.Cnt
                           jb         SetSw0
                           mov        ax, 0
             SetSw0:       mov        Sw0.Index, ax
                           call       PutStrInBuf
                           jmp        NoChanges



             NoSw0:        test       al, 2              ;See if Sw1 (left sw) was pressed.
                           jz         NoSw1
                           cmp        Sw1.Pgmd, 0
                           je         NoChanges
                           mov        ax, 0
                           mov        Left.Index, ax     ;Reset the key indexes for all keys
                           mov        Right.Index, ax    ; except Sw1.
                           mov        Up.Index, ax
                           mov        Down.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw0.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw2.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw3.Index, ax
                           mov        bx, Sw1.Index
                           mov        ax, Sw1.Index
                           mov        bx, Sw1.Ptrs[bx]
                           add        ax, 2
                           cmp        ax, Sw1.Cnt
                           jb         SetSw1
                           mov        ax, 0
             SetSw1:       mov        Sw1.Index, ax
                           call       PutStrInBuf
                           jmp        NoChanges


             NoSw1:        test       al, 4              ;See if Sw2 (middle sw) was pressed.
                           jz         NoSw2
                           cmp        Sw2.Pgmd, 0
                           je         NoChanges
                           mov        ax, 0


Page 1300
                                                           The Game Adapter

          mov    Left.Index, ax     ;Reset the key indexes for all keys
          mov    Right.Index, ax    ; except Sw2.
          mov    Up.Index, ax
          mov    Down.Index, ax
          mov    Sw0.Index, ax
          mov    Sw1.Index, ax
          mov    Sw3.Index, ax
          mov    bx, Sw2.Index
          mov    ax, Sw2.Index
          mov    bx, Sw2.Ptrs[bx]
          add    ax, 2
          cmp    ax, Sw2.Cnt
          jb     SetSw2
          mov    ax, 0
SetSw2:   mov    Sw2.Index, ax
          call   PutStrInBuf
          jmp    NoChanges


NoSw2:    test   al, 8              ;See if Sw3 (right sw) was pressed.
          jz     NoSw3
          cmp    Sw3.Pgmd, 0
          je     NoChanges
          mov    ax, 0
          mov    Left.Index, ax     ;Reset the key indexes for all keys
          mov    Right.Index, ax    ; except Sw3.
          mov    Up.Index, ax
          mov    Down.Index, ax
          mov    Sw0.Index, ax
          mov    Sw1.Index, ax
          mov    Sw2.Index, ax
          mov    bx, Sw3.Index
          mov    ax, Sw3.Index
          mov    bx, Sw3.Ptrs[bx]
          add    ax, 2
          cmp    ax, Sw3.Cnt
          jb     SetSw3
          mov    ax, 0
SetSw3:   mov    Sw3.Index, ax
          call   PutStrInBuf
          jmp    NoChanges


NoSw3:    test   al, 10h            ;See if Cooly was pressed upwards.
          jz     NoUp
          cmp    Up.Pgmd, 0
          je     NoChanges
          mov    ax, 0
          mov    Right.Index, ax    ;Reset all but Up.
          mov    Left.Index, ax
          mov    Down.Index, ax
          mov    Sw0.Index, ax
          mov    Sw1.Index, ax
          mov    Sw2.Index, ax
          mov    Sw3.Index, ax
          mov    bx, Up.Index
          mov    ax, Up.Index
          mov    bx, Up.Ptrs[bx]
          add    ax, 2
          cmp    ax, Up.Cnt
          jb     SetUp
          mov    ax, 0
SetUp:    mov    Up.Index, ax
          call   PutStrInBuf
          jmp    NoChanges


NoUp:     test   al, 20h            ;See if Cooley was pressed left.
          jz     NoLeft
          cmp    Left.Pgmd, 0
          je     NoChanges
          mov    ax, 0
          mov    Right.Index, ax    ;Reset all but Left.
          mov    Up.Index, ax


                                                                  Page 1301
Chapter 24

                           mov        Down.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw0.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw1.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw2.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw3.Index, ax
                           mov        bx, Left.Index
                           mov        ax, Left.Index
                           mov        bx, Left.Ptrs[bx]
                           add        ax, 2
                           cmp        ax, Left.Cnt
                           jb         SetLeft
                           mov        ax, 0
             SetLeft:      mov        Left.Index, ax
                           call       PutStrInBuf
                           jmp        NoChanges


             NoLeft:       test       al, 40h           ;See if Cooley was pressed Right
                           jz         NoRight
                           cmp        Right.Pgmd, 0
                           je         NoChanges
                           mov        ax, 0
                           mov        Left.Index, ax    ;Reset all but Right.
                           mov        Up.Index, ax
                           mov        Down.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw0.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw1.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw2.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw3.Index, ax
                           mov        bx, Right.Index
                           mov        ax, Right.Index
                           mov        bx, Right.Ptrs[bx]
                           add        ax, 2
                           cmp        ax, Right.Cnt
                           jb         SetRight
                           mov        ax, 0
             SetRight:     mov        Right.Index, ax
                           call       PutStrInBuf
                           jmp        NoChanges


             NoRight:      test       al, 80h           ;See if Cooly was pressed Downward.
                           jz         NoChanges
                           cmp        Down.Pgmd, 0
                           je         NoChanges
                           mov        ax, 0
                           mov        Left.Index, ax    ;Reset all but Down.
                           mov        Up.Index, ax
                           mov        Right.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw0.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw1.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw2.Index, ax
                           mov        Sw3.Index, ax
                           mov        bx, Down.Index
                           mov        ax, Down.Index
                           mov        bx, Down.Ptrs[bx]
                           add        ax, 2
                           cmp        ax, Down.Cnt
                           jb         SetDown
                           mov        ax, 0
             SetDown:      mov        Down.Index, ax
                           call       PutStrInBuf

             NoChanges:    pop        dx
                           pop        bx
                           pop        ax
                           pop        ds
                           jmp        cs:Int1CVect
             MyInt1c       endp
                           assume     ds:nothing

             ; PutStrInBuf- BX points at a zero terminated string of words.
             ;              Output each word by calling PutInBuffer.



Page 1302
                                                                 The Game Adapter

PutStrInBuf     proc     near
                push     ax
                push     bx
PutLoop:        mov      ax, [bx]
                test     ax, ax
                jz       PutDone
                call     PutInBuffer
                add      bx, 2
                jmp      PutLoop

PutDone:        pop      bx
                pop      ax
                ret
PutStrInBuf     endp

; PutInBuffer- Outputs character and scan code in AX to the type ahead
; buffer.

                assume   ds:nothing
KbdHead         equ      word ptr ds:[1ah]
KbdTail         equ      word ptr ds:[1ch]
KbdBuffer       equ      word ptr ds:[1eh]
EndKbd          equ      3eh
Buffer          equ      1eh

PutInBuffer     proc     near
                push     ds
                push     bx
                mov      bx, 40h
                mov      ds, bx
                pushf
                cli                          ;This is a critical region!
                mov      bx, KbdTail         ;Get ptr to end of type
                inc      bx                  ; ahead buffer and make room
                inc      bx                  ; for this character.
                cmp      bx, buffer+32       ;At physical end of buffer?
                jb       NoWrap
                mov      bx, buffer          ;Wrap back to 1eH if at end.
;
NoWrap:         cmp      bx, KbdHead         ;Buffer overrun?
                je       PIBDone
                xchg     KbdTail, bx         ;Set new, get old, ptrs.
                mov      ds:[bx], ax         ;Output AX to old location.
PIBDone:        popf                         ;Restore interrupts
                pop      bx
                pop      ds
                ret
PutInBuffer     endp



;****************************************************************************
;
; FindCode: On entry, ES:DI points at some code in *this* program which
;         appears in the ATP game. DS:SI points at a block of memory
;         in the XWing game. FindCode searches through memory to find the
;         suspect piece of code and returns DS:SI pointing at the start of
;         that code. This code assumes that it *will* find the code!
;         It returns the carry clear if it finds it, set if it doesn’t.

FindCode        proc     near
                push     ax
                push     bx
                push     dx

DoCmp:          mov      dx, 1000h
CmpLoop:        push     di                  ;Save ptr to compare code.
                push     si                  ;Save ptr to start of string.
                push     cx                  ;Save count.
           repe cmpsb
                pop      cx
                pop      si
                pop      di
                je       FoundCode


                                                                           Page 1303
Chapter 24

                            inc       si
                            dec       dx
                            jne       CmpLoop
                            sub       si, 1000h
                            mov       ax, ds
                            inc       ah
                            mov       ds, ax
                            cmp       ax, 9000h
                            jb        DoCmp

                            pop       dx
                            pop       bx
                            pop       ax
                            stc
                            ret

             FoundCode:     pop       dx
                            pop       bx
                            pop       ax
                            clc
                            ret
             FindCode       endp


             ;****************************************************************************
             ;
             ; Joystick and button routines which appear in XWing game. This code is
             ; really data as the INT 21h patch code searches through memory for this code
             ; after loading a file from disk.



             JoyStickCode   proc      near
                            sti
                            neg       bx
                            neg       di
                            pop       bp
                            pop       dx
                            pop       cx
                            ret
                            mov       bp, bx
                            in        al, dx
                            mov       bl, al
                            not       al
                            and       al, ah
                            jnz       $+11h
                            in        al, dx
             JoyStickCode   endp
             EndJSC:

             JoyLength      =         EndJSC-JoyStickCode

             ReadSwCode     proc
                            mov       dx,   201h
                            in        al,   dx
                            xor       al,   0ffh
                            and       ax,   0f0h
             ReadSwCode     endp
             EndRSC:

             ButtonLength   =         EndRSC-ReadSwCode

             cseg           ends


             Installation   segment

             ; Move these things here so they do not consume too much space in the
             ; resident part of the patch.

             DfltFCB        byte      3,” “,0,0,0,0,0
             CmdLine        byte      2, “ “, 0dh, 126 dup (“ “)      ;Cmd line for program
             Pgm            byte      “XWING.EXE”,0
                            byte      128 dup (?)                     ;For user’s name


Page 1304
                                                                  The Game Adapter



; ChkBIOS15- Checks to see if the INT 15 driver for FSPro is present in memory.

ChkBIOS15     proc       far
              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 8100h
              int        15h
              mov        di, bx
              strcmpl
              byte       “CH Products:Flightstick Pro”,0
              jne        NoDriverLoaded
              ret

NoDriverLoaded:
              print
              byte       “CH Products SGDI driver for Flightstick Pro is not “
              byte       “loaded into memory.”,cr,lf
              byte       “Please run FSPSGDI before running this program.”
              byte       cr,lf,0
              exitpgm

ChkBIOS15     endp


;****************************************************************************
;
; Identify-   Prints a sign-on message.

              assume     ds:nothing
Identify      proc       far

; Print a welcome string. Note that the string “VersionStr” will be
; modified by the “version.exe” program each time you assemble this code.

              print
              byte       cr,lf,lf
              byte       “X W I N G P A T C H”,cr,lf
              byte       “CH Products Flightstick Pro”,cr,lf
              byte       “Copyright 1994, Randall Hyde”,cr,lf
              byte       lf
              byte       0

              ret
Identify      endp

;****************************************************************************
;
; Calibrate the throttle down here:

              assume     ds:nothing
Calibrate     proc       far
              print
              byte       cr,lf,lf
              byte       “Calibration:”,cr,lf,lf
              byte       “Move the throttle to one extreme and press any “
              byte       “button:”,0

              call       Wait4Button
              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 1h
              int        15h
              push       dx                ;Save pot 3 reading.

              print
              byte       cr,lf
              byte       “Move the throttle to the other extreme and press “
              byte       “any button:”,0

              call       Wait4Button
              mov        ah, 84h
              mov        dx, 1
              int        15h
              pop        bx


                                                                         Page 1305
Chapter 24

                                mov            ax, dx
                                cmp            ax, bx
                                jb             RangeOkay
                                xchg           ax, bx
             RangeOkay:         mov            cx, bx                    ;Compute a centered value.
                                sub            cx, ax
                                shr            cx, 1
                                add            cx, ax
                                mov            ah, 84h
                                mov            dx, 303h                  ;Calibrate pot three.
                                int            15h
                                ret
             Calibrate          endp



             Wait4Button        proc           near
                                mov            ah, 84h                  ;First, wait for all buttons
                                mov            dx, 0                    ; to be released.
                                int            15h
                                and            al, 0F0h
                                cmp            al, 0F0h
                                jne            Wait4Button

                                mov            cx, 0
             Delay:             loop           Delay

             Wait4Press:        mov            ah, 1                    ;Eat any characters from the
                                int            16h                      ; keyboard which come along, and
                                je             NoKbd                    ; handle ctrl-C as appropriate.
                                getc

             NoKbd:             mov            ah, 84h                  ;Now wait for any button to be
                                mov            dx, 0                    ; pressed.
                                int            15h
                                and            al, 0F0h
                                cmp            al, 0F0h
                                je             Wait4Press

                                ret
             Wait4Button        endp
             Installation       ends

             sseg               segment        para stack ‘STACK’
                                word           256 dup (0)
             endstk             word           ?
             sseg               ends

             zzzzzzseg          segment         para public ‘zzzzzzseg’
             Heap               byte            1024 dup (0)
             zzzzzzseg          ends
                                end            Main




24.8    Summary
                  The PC’s game adapter card lets you connect a wide variety of game related input devices to your PC.
             Such devices include digital joysticks, paddles, analog joysticks, steering wheels, yokes, and more. Paddle
             input devices provide one degree of freedom, joysticks provide two degrees of freedom along an (X,Y)
             axis pair. Steering wheels and yokes also provide two degrees of freedom, though they are designed for
             different types of games. For more information on these input devices, see
                      •    “Typical Game Devices” on page 1255
                  Most game input devices connect to the PC through the game adapter card. This device provides for
             up to four digital (switch) inputs and four analog (resistive) inputs. This device appears as a single I/O
             location in the PC’s I/O address space. Four of the bits at this port correspond to the four switches, four of
             the inputs provide the status of the timer pulses from the 558 chip for the analog inputs. The switches you


Page 1306
                                                                                        The Game Adapter

can read directly from the port; to read the analog inputs, you must create a timing loop to count how long
it takes for the pulse associated with a particular device to go from high to low. For more information on
the game adapter hardware, see:
         •    “The Game Adapter Hardware” on page 1257
     Programming the game adapter would be a simple task except that you will get different readings for
the same relative pot position with different game adapter cards, game input devices, computer systems,
and software. The real trick to programming the game adapter is to produce consistent results, regardless
of the actual hardware in use. If you can live with raw input values, the BIOS provides two functions to
read the switches and the analog inputs. However, if you need normalized values, you will probably have
to write your own code. Still, writing such code is very easy if you remember some basic high school alge-
bra. So see how this is done, check out
         •    “Using BIOS’ Game I/O Functions” on page 1259
         •    “Writing Your Own Game I/O Routines” on page 1260
     As with the other devices on the PC, there is a problem with accessing the game adapter hardware
directly, such code will not work with game input hardware that doesn’t adhere strictly to the original PC’s
design criteria. Fancy game input devices like the Thrustmaster joystick and the CH Product’s FlightStick
Pro will require you to write special software drivers. Furthermore, your basic joystick code may not even
work with future devices, even if they provide a minimal set of features compatible with standard game
input devices. Unfortunately, the BIOS services are very slow and not very good, so few programmers
make BIOS calls, allowing third party developers to provide replacement device drivers for their game
devices. To help alleviate this problem, this chapter presents the Standard Game Device Input application
programmer’s interface – a set of functions specifically designed to provide an extensible, portable, system
for game input device programmers. The current specification provides for up to 256 digital and 256 ana-
log input devices and is easily extended to handle output devices and other input devices as well. For the
details, see
         •    “The Standard Game Device Interface (SGDI)” on page 1262
         •    “Application Programmer’s Interface (API)” on page 1262
     Since this chapter introduces the SGDI driver, there aren’t many SGDI drivers provided by game
adapter manufacturers at this point. So if you write software that makes SGDI driver calls, you will find that
there are few machines that will have an SGDI TSR in memory. Therefore, this chapter provides SGDI driv-
ers for the standard game adapter card and the standard input devices. It also provides an SGDI driver for
the CH Products’ FlightStick Pro joystick. To obtain these freely distributable drivers, see
         •    “An SGDI Driver for the Standard Game Adapter Card” on page 1265
         •    “An SGDI Driver for the CH Products’ Flight Stick Pro” on page 1280
     This chapter concludes with an example of a semiresident program that makes SGDI calls. This pro-
gram, that patches the popular XWing game, provides full support for the CH Product’s FlightStick Pro in
XWing. This program demonstrates many of the features of an SGDI driver as well as providing and exam-
ple of how to patch a commercially available game. For the explanation and the source code, see
         •    “Patching Existing Games” on page 1293




                                                                                                  Page 1307
Chapter 24




Page 1308
