Why Would Anyone Learn This Stuff?                                                                               Forward
                          Amazing! You’re actually reading this. That puts you into one of three categories: a student who is
                     being forced to read this stuff for a class, someone who picked up this book by accident (probably
                     because you have yet to be indoctrinated by the world at large), or one of the few who actually have an
                     interest in learning assembly language.
                           Egads. What kind of book begins this way? What kind of author would begin the book with a forward
                     like this one? Well, the truth is, I considered putting this stuff into the first chapter since most people never
                     bother reading the forward. A discussion of what’s right and what’s wrong with assembly language is very
                     important and sticking it into a chapter might encourage someone to read it. However, I quickly found
                     that university students can skip Chapter One as easily as they can skip a forward, so this stuff wound up
                     in a forward after all.
                           So why would anyone learn this stuff, anyway? Well, there are several reasons which come to mind:
                                •     Your major requires a course in assembly language; i.e., you’re here against your will.
                                •     A programmer where you work quit. Most of the source code left behind was written
                                      in assembly language and you were elected to maintain it.
                                •     Your boss has the audacity to insist that you write your code in assembly against your
                                      strongest wishes.
                                •     Your programs run just a little too slow, or are a little too large and you think assembly
                                      language might help you get your project under control.
                                •     You want to understand how computers actually work.
                                •     You’re interested in learning how to write efficient code.
                                •     You want to try something new.

                          Well, whatever the reason you’re here, welcome aboard. Let’s take a look at the subject you’re about
                     to study.


1        What’s Wrong With Assembly Language

                          Assembly language has a pretty bad reputation. The common impression about assembly language
                     programmers today is that they are all hackers or misguided individuals who need enlightenment. Here
                     are the reasons people give for not using assembly1:
                                •     Assembly is hard to learn.
                                •     Assembly is hard to read and understand.
                                •     Assembly is hard to debug.
                                •     Assembly is hard to maintain.
                                •     Assembly is hard to write.
                                •     Assembly language programming is time consuming.
                                •     Improved compiler technology has eliminated the need for assembly language.
                                •     Today, machines are so fast that we no longer need to use assembly.
                                •     If you need more speed, you should use a better algorithm rather than switch to assem-
                                      bly language.
                                •     Machines have so much memory today, saving space using assembly is not important.
                                •     Assembly language is not portable.


    1. This text will use the terms “Assembly language” and “assembly” interchangeably.

                                                                                                                              Page 1

                                  Thi d             t            t d ith F           M k   402
Forward

          These are some strong statements indeed!
               Given that this is a book which teaches assembly language programming, written for college level
          students, written by someone who appears to know what he’s talking about, your natural tendency is to
          believe something if it appears in print. Having just read the above, you’re starting to assume that assembly
          must be pretty bad. And that, dear friend, is eighty percent of what’s wrong with assembly language. That
          is, people develop some very strong misconceptions about assembly language based on what they’ve
          heard from friends, instructors, articles, and books. Oh, assembly language is certainly not perfect. It does
          have many real faults. Those faults, however, are blown completely out of proportion by those unfamiliar
          with assembly language. The next time someone starts preaching about the evils of assembly language,
          ask, “how many years of assembly language programming experience do you have?” Of course assembly
          is hard to understand if you don’t know it. It is surprising how many people are willing to speak out
          against assembly language based only on conversations they’ve had or articles they’ve read.
              Assembly language users also use high level languages (HLLs); assembly’s most outspoken oppo-
          nents rarely use anything but HLLs. Who would you believe, an expert well versed in both types of pro-
          gramming languages or someone who has never taken the time to learn assembly language and develop
          an honest opinion of its capabilities?
               In a conversation with someone, I would go to great lengths to address each of the above issues.
          Indeed, in a rough draft of this chapter I spent about ten pages explaining what is wrong with each of the
          above statements. However, this book is long enough and I felt that very little was gained by going on and
          on about these points. Nonetheless, a brief rebuttal to each of the above points is in order, if for no other
          reason than to keep you from thinking there isn’t a decent defense for these statements.
               Assembly is hard to learn. So is any language you don’t already know. Try learning (really learn-
          ing) APL, Prolog, or Smalltalk sometime. Once you learn Pascal, learning another language like C, BASIC,
          FORTRAN, Modula-2, or Ada is fairly easy because these languages are quite similar to Pascal. On the
          other hand, learning a dissimilar language like Prolog is not so simple. Assembly language is also quite dif-
          ferent from Pascal. It will be a little harder to learn than one of the other Pascal-like languages. However,
          learning assembly isn’t much more difficult than learning your first programming language.
                Assembly is hard to read and understand. It sure is, if you don’t know it. Most people who make
          this statement simply don’t know assembly. Of course, it’s very easy to write impossible-to-read assembly
          language programs. It’s also quite easy to write impossible-to-read C, Prolog, and APL programs. With
          experience, you will find assembly as easy to read as other languages.
               Assembly is hard to debug. Same argument as above. If you don’t have much experience debug-
          ging assembly language programs, it’s going to be hard to debug them. Remember what it was like finding
          bugs in your first Pascal (or other HLL) programs? Anytime you learn a new programming language you’ll
          have problems debugging programs in that language until you gain experience.
               Assembly is hard to maintain. C programs are hard to maintain. Indeed, programs are hard to
          maintain period. Inexperienced assembly language programmers tend to write hard to maintain programs.
          Writing maintainable programs isn’t a talent. It’s a skill you develop through experience.
               Assembly language is hard. This statement actually has a ring of truth to it. For the longest time
          assembly language programmers wrote their programs completely from scratch, often “re-inventing the
          wheel.” HLL programmers, especially C, Ada, and Modula-2 programmers, have long enjoyed the benefits
          of a standard library package which solves many common programming problems. Assembly language
          programmers, on the other hand, have been known to rewrite an integer output routine every time they
          need one. This book does not take that approach. Instead, it takes advantage of some work done at the
          University of California, Riverside: the UCR Standard Library for 80x86 Assembly Language Programmers.
          These subroutines simplify assembly language just as the C standard library aids C programmers. The
          library source listings are available electronically via Internet and various other communication services as
          well as on a companion diskette.
              Assembly language programming is time consuming. Software engineers estimate that devel-
          opers spend only about thirty percent of their time coding a solution to a problem. Even if it took twice as

Page 2
                                                                                               Why Would Anyone Learn This Stuff?

                 much time to write a program in assembly versus some HLL, there would only be a fifteen percent differ-
                 ence in the total project completion time. In fact, good assembly language programmers do not need twice
                 as much time to implement something in assembly language. It is true using a HLL will save some time;
                 however, the savings is insufficient to counter the benefits of using assembly language.
                      Improved compiler technology has eliminated the need for assembly language. This isn’t
                 true and probably never will be true. Optimizing compilers are getting better every day. However, assem-
                 bly language programmers get better performance by writing their code differently than they would if they
                 were using some HLL. If assembly language programmers wrote their programs in C and then translated
                 them manually into assembly, a good C compiler would produce equivalent, or even better, code. Those
                 who make this claim about compiler technology are comparing their hand-compiled code against that
                 produced by a compiler. Compilers do a much better job of compiling than humans. Then again, you’ll
                 never catch an assembly language programmer writing “C code with MOV instructions.” After all, that’s
                 why you use C compilers.
                       Today, machines are so fast that we no longer need to use assembly. It is amazing that people
                 will spend lots of money to buy a machine slightly faster than the one they own, but they won’t spend any
                 extra time writing their code in assembly so it runs faster on the same hardware. There are many raging
                 debates about the speed of machines versus the speed of the software, but one fact remains: users always
                 want more speed. On any given machine, the fastest possible programs will be written in assembly lan-
                 guage2.
                      If you need more speed, you should use a better algorithm rather than switch to assembly
                 language. Why can’t you use this better algorithm in assembly language? What if you’re already using the
                 best algorithm you can find and it’s still too slow? This is a totally bogus argument against assembly lan-
                 guage. Any algorithm you can implement in a HLL you can implement in assembly. On the other hand,
                 there are many algorithms you can implement in assembly which you cannot implement in a HLL3.
                      Machines have so much memory today, saving space using assembly is not important. If
                 you give someone an inch, they’ll take a mile. Nowhere in programming does this saying have more appli-
                 cation than in program memory use. For the longest time, programmers were quite happy with 4 Kbytes.
                 Later, machines had 32 or even 64 Kilobytes. The programs filled up memory accordingly. Today, many
                 machines have 32 or 64 megabytes of memory installed and some applications use it all. There are lots of
                 technical reasons why programmers should strive to write shorter programs, though now is not the time to
                 go into that. Let’s just say that space is important and programmers should strive to write programs as short
                 as possible regardless of how much main memory they have in their machine.
                      Assembly language is not portable. This is an undeniable fact. An 80x86 assembly language pro-
                 gram written for an IBM PC will not run on an Apple Macintosh4. Indeed, assembly language programs
                 written for the Apple Macintosh will not run on an Amiga, even though they share the same 680x0 micro-
                 processor. If you need to run your program on different machines, you’ll have to think long and hard
                 about using assembly language. Using C (or some other HLL) is no guarantee that your program will be
                 portable. C programs written for the IBM PC won’t compile and run on a Macintosh. And even if they did,
                 most Mac owners wouldn’t accept the result.
                      Portability is probably the biggest complaint people have against assembly language. They refuse to
                 use assembly because it is not portable, and then they turn around and write equally non-portable pro-
                 grams in C.
                    Yes, there are lots of lies, misconceptions, myths, and half-truths concerning assembly language.
                 Whatever you do, make sure you learn assembly language before forming your own opinions5. Speaking

2. That is not to imply that assembly language programs are always faster than HLL programs. A poorly written assembly language program can run
much slower than an equivalent HLL program. On the other hand, if a program is written in an HLL it is certainly possible to write a faster one in
assembly.
3. We’ll see some of these algorithms later in the book. They deal with instruction sequencing and other tricks based on how the processor oper-
ates.
4. Strictly speaking, this is not true. There is a program called SoftPC which emulates an IBM PC using an 80286 interpreter. However, 80x86 assem-
bly language programs will not run in native mode on the Mac’s 680x0 microprocessor.

                                                                                                                                          Page 3
Forward

                     out in ignorance may impress others who know less than you do, but it won’t impress those who know
                     the truth.


2         What’s Right With Assembly Language?

                         An old joke goes something like this: “There are three reasons for using assembly language: speed,
                     speed, and more speed.” Even those who absolutely hate assembly language will admit that if speed is
                     your primary concern, assembly language is the way to go. Assembly language has several benefits:
                                 •     Speed. Assembly language programs are generally the fastest programs around.
                                 •     Space. Assembly language programs are often the smallest.
                                 •     Capability. You can do things in assembly which are difficult or impossible in HLLs.
                                 •     Knowledge. Your knowledge of assembly language will help you write better pro-
                                       grams, even when using HLLs.
                          Assembly language is the uncontested speed champion among programming languages. An expert
                     assembly language programmer will almost always produce a faster program than an expert C program-
                     mer6. While certain programs may not benefit much from implementation in assembly, you can speed up
                     many programs by a factor of five or ten over their HLL counterparts by careful coding in assembly lan-
                     guage; even greater improvement is possible if you’re not using an optimizing compiler. Alas, speedups
                     on the order of five to ten times are generally not achieved by beginning assembly language programmers.
                     However, if you spend the time to learn assembly language really well, you too can achieve these impres-
                     sive performance gains.
                           Despite some people’s claims that programmers no longer have to worry about memory constraints,
                     there are many programmers who need to write smaller programs. Assembly language programs are often
                     less than one-half the size of comparable HLL programs. This is especially impressive when you consider
                     the fact that data items generally consume the same amount of space in both types of programs, and that
                     data is responsible for a good amount of the space used by a typical application. Saving space saves
                     money. Pure and simple. If a program requires 1.5 megabytes, it will not fit on a 1.44 Mbyte floppy. Like-
                     wise, if an application requires 2 megabytes RAM, the user will have to install an extra megabyte if there is
                     only one available in the machine7. Even on big machines with 32 or more megabytes, writing gigantic
                     applications isn’t excusable. Most users put more than eight megabytes in their machines so they can run
                     multiple programs from memory at one time. The bigger a program is, the fewer applications will be able
                     to coexist in memory with it. Virtual memory isn’t a particularly attractive solution either. With virtual
                     memory, the bigger an application is, the slower the system will run as a result of that program’s size.
                          Capability is another reason people resort to assembly language. HLLs are an abstraction of a typical
                     machine architecture. They are designed to be independent of the particular machine architecture. As a
                     result, they rarely take into account any special features of the machine, features which are available to
                     assembly language programmers. If you want to use such features, you will need to use assembly lan-
                     guage. A really good example is the input/output instructions available on the 80x86 microprocessors.
                     These instructions let you directly access certain I/O devices on the computer. In general, such access is
                     not part of any high level language. Indeed, some languages like C pride themselves on not supporting




    5. Alas, a typical ten-week course is rarely sufficient to learn assembly language well enough to develop an informed opinion on the subject. Prob-
    ably three months of eight-hour days using the stuff would elevate you to the point where you could begin to make some informed statements on
    the subject. Most people wouldn’t be able to consider themselves “good” at assembly language programs until they’ve been using the stuff for at
    least a year.
    6. There is absolutely no reason why an assembly language programmer would produce a slower program since that programmer could look at the
    output of the C compiler and copy whatever code runs faster than the hand produced code. HLL programmers don’t have an equivalent option.
    7. You can substitute any numbers here you like. One fact remains though, programmers are famous for assuming users have more memory than
    they really do.

Page 4
                                                                                                   Why Would Anyone Learn This Stuff?

                     any specific I/O operations8. In assembly language you have no such restrictions. Anything you can do on
                     the machine you can do in assembly language. This is definitely not the case with most HLLs.
                          Of course, another reason for learning assembly language is just for the knowledge. Now some of
                     you may be thinking, “Gee, that would be wonderful, but I’ve got lots to do. My time would be better
                     spent writing code than learning assembly language.” There are some practical reasons for learning assem-
                     bly, even if you never intend to write a single line of assembly code. If you know assembly language well,
                     you’ll have an appreciation for the compiler, and you’ll know exactly what the compiler is doing with all
                     those HLL statements. Once you see how compilers translate seemingly innocuous statements into a ton of
                     machine code, you’ll want to search for better ways to accomplish the same thing. Good assembly lan-
                     guage programmers make better HLL programmers because they understand the limitations of the com-
                     piler and they know what it’s doing with their code. Those who don’t know assembly language will accept
                     the poor performance their compiler produces and simply shrug it off.
                          Yes, assembly language is definitely worth the effort. The only scary thing is that once you learn it
                     really well, you’ll probably start using it far more than you ever dreamed you would. That is a common
                     malady among assembly language programmers. Seems they can’t stand what the compilers are doing
                     with their programs.


3        Organization of This Text and Pedagogical Concerns

                           This book is divided into seven main sections: a section on machine organization and architecture, a
                     section on basic assembly language, a section on intermediate assembly language, a section on interrupts
                     and resident programs, a section covering IBM PC hardware peculiarities, a section on optimization, and
                     various appendices. It is doubtful that any single (even year-long) college course could cover all this mate-
                     rial, the final chapters were included to support compiler design, microcomputer design, operating sys-
                     tems, and other courses often found in a typical CS program.
                          Developing a text such as this one is a very difficult task. First of all, different universities have differ-
                     ent ideas about how this course should be taught. Furthermore, different schools spend differing amounts
                     of time on this subject (one or two quarters, a semester, or even a year). Furthermore, different schools
                     cover different material in the course. For example, some schools teach a “Machine Organization” course
                     that emphasizes hardware concepts and presents the assembly language instruction set, but does not
                     expect students to write real assembly language programs (that’s the job of a compiler). Other schools
                     teach a “Machine Organization and Assembly Language” course that combines hardware and software
                     issues together into one course. Still others teach a “Machine Organization” or “Digital Logic” course as a
                     prerequisite to an “Assembly Language” course. Still others teach “Assembly Language Programming” as a
                     course and leave the hardware for a “Computer Architecture” course later in the curriculum. Finally, let us
                     not forget that some people will pick up this text and use it to learn machine organization or assembly lan-
                     guage programming on their own, without taking a formal course on the subject. A good textbook in this
                     subject area must be adaptable to the needs of the course, instructor, and student. These requirements
                     place enough demands on an author, but I wanted more for this text. Many textbooks teach a particular
                     subject well, but once you’ve read and understood them, they do not serve well as a reference guide.
                     Given the cost of textbooks today, it is a real shame that many textbooks’ value diminishes once the
                     course is complete. I sought to create a textbook that will explain many difficult concepts in as friendly a
                     manner as possible and will serve as a reference guide once you’ve mastered the topic. By moving
                     advanced material you probably won’t cover in a typical college course into later chapters and by organiz-
                     ing this text so you can continue using it once the course is over, I hope to provide you with an excellent
                     value in this text.
                         Since this volume attempts to satisfy the requirements of several different courses, as well as provide
                     an excellent reference, you will probably find that it contains far more material than any single course


    8. Certain languages on the PC support extensions to access the I/O devices since this is such an obvious limitation of the language. However, such
    extensions are not part of the actual language.

                                                                                                                                              Page 5
Forward

          would actually cover. For example, the first section of this text covers machine organization. If you’ve
          already covered this material in a previous course, your instructor may elect to skip the first four chapters
          or so. For those courses that teach only assembly language, the instructor may decide to skip chapters two
          and three. Schools operating on a ten-week quarter system may cover the material in each chapter only
          briefly (about one week per chapter). Other schools may cover the material in much greater depth
          because they have more time.
               When writing this text, I choose to pick a subject and cover it in depth before proceeding to the next
          topic. This pedagogy (teaching method) is unusual. Most assembly language texts jump around to differ-
          ent topics, lightly touching on each one and returning to them as further explanation is necessary. Unfor-
          tunately, such texts make poor references; trying to lookup information in such a book is difficult, at best,
          because the information is spread throughout the book. Since I want this text to serve as a reasonable ref-
          erence manual, such an organization was unappealing.
                The problem with a straight reference manual is three-fold. First, reference manuals are often orga-
          nized in a manner that makes it easy to look something up, not in a logical order that makes the material
          easy to learn. For example, most assembly language reference manuals introduce the instruction set in
          alphabetical order. However, you do not learn the instruction set in this manner. The second problem with
          a (good) reference manual is that it presents the material in far greater depth than most beginners can han-
          dle; this is why most texts keep returning to a subject, they add a little more depth on each return to the
          subject. Finally, reference texts can present material in any order. The author need not ensure that a dis-
          cussion only include material appearing earlier in the text. Material in the early chapters of a reference
          manual can refer to later chapters; a typical college textbook should not do this.
                To receive maximum benefit from this text, you need to read it understanding its organization. This is
          not a text you read from front to back, making sure you understand each and every little detail before pro-
          ceeding to the next. I’ve covered many topics in this text in considerable detail. Someone learning assem-
          bly language for the first time will become overwhelmed with the material that appears in each chapter.
          Typically, you will read over a chapter once to learn the basic essentials and then refer back to each chap-
          ter learning additional material as you need it. Since it is unlikely that you will know which material is
          basic or advanced, I’ve taken the liberty of describing which sections are basic, intermediate, or advanced
          at the beginning of each chapter. A ten-week course, covering this entire text for example, might only deal
          with the basic topics. In a semester course, there is time to cover the intermediate material as well.
          Depending on prerequisites and length of course, the instructor can elect to teach this material at any level
          of detail (or even jump around in the text).
                In the past, if a student left an assembly language class and could actually implement an algorithm in
          assembly language, the instructor probably considered the course a success. However, compiler technol-
          ogy has progressed to the point that simply “getting something to work” in assembly language is pure
          folly. If you don’t write your code efficiently in assembly language, you may as well stick with HLLs.
          They’re easy to use, and the compiler will probably generate faster code than you if you’re careless in the
          coding process.
               This text spends a great deal of time on machine and data organization. There are two important rea-
          sons for this. First of all, to write efficient code on modern day processors requires an intimate knowledge
          of what’s going on in the hardware. Without this knowledge, your programs on the 80486 and later could
          run at less than half their possible speed. To write the best possible assembly language programs you must
          be familiar with how the hardware operates. Another reason this text emphasizes computer organization is
          that most colleges and universities are more interested in teaching machine organization than they are a
          particular assembly language. While the typical college student won’t have much need for assembly lan-
          guage during the four years as an undergraduate, the machine organization portion of the class is useful in
          several upper division classes. Classes like data structures and algorithms, computer architecture, operat-
          ing systems, programming language design, and compilers all benefit from an introductory course in com-
          puter organization. That’s why this text devotes an entire section to that subject.




Page 6
                                                                           Why Would Anyone Learn This Stuff?


4   Obtaining Program Source Listings and Other Materials in This Text

               All of the software appearing in this text is available on the companion diskette. The material for this
          text comes in two parts: source listings of various examples presented in this text and the code for the UCR
          Standard Library for 80x86 Assembly Language Programmers. The UCR Standard Library is also available
          electronically from several different sources (including Internet, BIX, and other on-line services).
              You may obtain the files electronically via ftp from the following Internet address:
                                                         ftp.cs.ucr.edu
          Log onto ftp.cs.ucr.edu using the anonymous account name and any password. Switch to the “/pub/pc/
          ibmpcdir” subdirectory (this is UNIX so make sure you use lowercase letters). You will find the appropri-
          ate files by searching through this directory.
               The exact filename(s) of this material may change with time, and different services use different
          names for these files. Generally posting a message enquiring about the UCR Standard Library or this text
          will generate appropriate responses.




                                                                                                               Page 7
Forward




Page 8
